5/8/07
I was set apart this morning, 6:45 at President Miller’s home (not the seminary building, which was where we went at first). Mom, Dad, Ammon, Sarah, Paige, Amanda, and Aaron were all there, and President Miller extended some powerful blessings with Ammon and Dad in the circle. Included were blessings of keen understanding and knowing what words to speak by inspiration, and also the gift of tongues and the interpretation of tongues. As I pondered on these I came to the remembrance that I can only obtain these blessings through faith and action, prayer, and a righteous unselfish (ungodly, if I might add) desire to use them in building the kingdom and blessing the lives of others.


From that time forward I have needed and will need a companion at all times, either of immediate family or another priesthood holder, although right now, in the basement of Grandpa and Grandma Taylor’s home. I am about to go to sleep with an empty bed on my right and the closest companion, my Grandma, sleeping exactly one floor above me. But I think I’m all right.


It’s hard to believe the time is actually now, as a set apart missionary I am serving the Lord, and as of 12:00pm tomorrow, I’ll have officially reported to the MTC. The experience is almost unreal, having heard your whole life about it and seeing older boys leave and return from ‘the mission’ but now I’m the one who’s leaving and the MTC isn’t some place in Utah and Russia isn’t just some far off country. The MTC is tomorrow, and Russia is the next two years!


5/10/07 - MTC: Clint Burgess
So yesterday was the MTC, and today was the MTC, and tomorrow, and the next 10 weeks. The MTC is really a time oriented place. I didn’t have time to write last night because we were trying to be in bed by 10:30 (not quite made it, but we did our best). It’s a little overwhelming trying to learn the language on the first day, but I’m confident that with the help of my companion, Elder Clint Burgess from Alpine, our teachers, Brother Wilson and Sister Zahajko, and most especially the Lord, it will all come together.


It also appears that in order to do everything expected of you, you must go beyond the expectations here at the MTC; especially with regards to time. We don’t seem to even have time for prayer w/o going past the set times! (speak of the devil, 10:30 & time for room prayer)


5/11/07
Well, I’ve got a little more time tonight, but only for lack of mission president letters to write. The second full day went by much faster than the first, and I think it will go by even faster once the language starts coming.


Russian is turning out to be every bit as difficult as I have been told. The different alphabet is a barrier I’m going to need to work on over the next few days.


My companion, Elder Burgess, is our district leader and a good elder. He has a little Russian experience from high school, so I’ll be needing his help for a little while, but I think we’ll be able to learn and grow in leaps and bounds in both spiritual terms and in the language.


5/12/07
Saturday night, S-A-T-U-R-DAY night! In the MTC, Saturday night is Friday night is Thursday night… all the same, which is nice as far as no worries about calling girls and making plans and staying up until 3am. No exceptions when it comes to the Lord and His work, even weekends. No letters yet, but I’ve been here a grand total of 3.5 days, so I’m not worried… plus, we get to be the first elders to use email in the MTC! (truly, a chosen generation ;) 


5/13/07
Well, my first Sunday here and I thought it would seem like any other day, especially when I found out our personal studying would be in the classroom for most of the morning. I can tell a difference, not just because of the sacrament and not because no language study today (or maybe that is why), but it really does feel like a Sunday. I dreamed for the first time last night, and I don’t remember much.


5/14/07
Another dream last night, so my body is getting adjusted, although I’m not exactly dreaming of missionary work (perhaps my subconscious is two years ahead of me), much less in anything close to Russian. I’m still trying to get a hold on the language, but I’m definitely feeling improvement. As a companionship, Elder Burgess and I have been memorizing scriptures as we walk between meals and class. So far we have JSH 1:16-17, Moroni 10:4-5, and John 14:15… in Russian (only the last one). 


5/16/07
Yesterday I sealed my first blessing/anointing. My companion is sick (cold, sore throat, & headache) and asked if he could have one. Elders Madsen and Kaye joined me, Elder Madsen anointed and then I sealed the blessing. I thought it appropriate to give a little history of the ordinances I’ve performed or helped with as a Melchizedek Priesthood holder. I first helped Dad as he blessed his cousin Leslie with a blessing of comfort and strength. The next time I exercised my priesthood was standing in the circle as Ammon blessed Paige. I then anointed when Wes Fassmann asked for a blessing after hurting his head, and Jesse Thomas sealed the blessing. The next blessing I gave was for Rebecca Forbush and Kayla Partridge. I was the voice for Rebecca’s blessing and Matt Scott was the other priesthood holder. Vice versa for Kayla, and those were blessings of comfort before finals. And the last time I used my Melchizedek Priesthood before yesterday’s blessing was baptizing for the dead in the Provo temple on the last day of finals. A group of us from our ward went to the temple early in the morning and performed the baptisms. It was a sweet experience, especially baptizing my roommate, Stephen Bolster.


5/17/07
Yesterday night was our first night teaching in the TRC. We practiced a short 5 minute memorized/read/slaughtered Russian message on the Restoration. After that was over, we taught a 30 minute lesson (the first lesson) on the Restoration in English. It was somewhat unnerving to begin with, but I think it went fairly well. The only thing I want to change is more clearly and directly teach… PMG has a quote about that which I ready today and really loved. “To be known, the truth must be stated and the clearer and more complete the statement is, the better the opportunity will the Holy Spirit have for testifying to the souls of men that the work is true’ - New witnesses for God


Letter to the branch president:
1. Right now I’m working on humility. In response to my first email home I received a little bit of a reprimand from my mother. It made me realize that I need to stop comparing myself and my district to others. The Lord’s work is about working together with the spirit. Not in competition.
2. I was studying prayer and came across the story of Hannah and her son Samuel. The part that struck me most was his response to the Lord when he finally realized who it was “speak, thy servant heareth.” As a missionary, I need to be able to hear Him whenever He wants to speak to us.
3. We are praying together and I also gave my companion a blessing. We are looking for and have planned opportunities to serve each other as well as serving others together
4. To invite the spirit, I have been keeping our apartment clean (w/my companion’s help of course) so the spirit can be with us always. I have also been trying to and will try and do better at keeping a prayer always in my heart.
5. Our district went to the RC tonight and it was an amazing experience. I talked to a man whose brother just died and he’s been drinking, but he saw a commercial for ‘Finding Faith in Christ’ and wanted to call and talk to someone. He’s having the missionaries over to teach him more! It’s quite the feeling to be doing actual missionary work (not just preparing) and knowing you’ve changed someone’s life for the better. It just added to my testimony that this is the Lord’s church and His work. I can’t wait to go out and help bring people to Christ full-time… to let them know what I know. That God is our Father and His son Jesus Christ atoned for us and this is His gospel, His plan for happiness. I know this and I want the people of Russia to know it too, and I bear testimony in His name, Jesus Christ, amen.


5/18/07
Last night was our first successful night at the RC (referral center) (Sister Zahako talked to the office, pulled a few strings & made sure we got calls). I talked to two people, John and Loida. John called for a free ‘Finding Faith in Christ’ video, and once I started talking to him, he told me how he had started drinking more heavily since his brother died (Melbourne, FL) and he just wanted someone to talk to and he lives alone, so he called. It was an amazing experience… throughout the opening of the call, I just read a script and took down his information, but the question that really made it real was ‘what prompted you to call for your free video?’. The call was real, and I realized it after that. I was talking to a real person on the other end and perhaps changing his life. He agreed to let me send the missionaries to him to deliver the DVD and he wrote down the address of the nearest church, but he doesn’t have a computer to look it up… the only thing that concerns me is that he thought he already had set up to have the missionaries come, so I sincerely hope the Elders in his area are diligent in following their media referrals and can help him, can invite him to Christ and bring the spirit into his life.


The other call I received, from Loida in Bridgeport, CT, was to receive a free copy of the Bible. She said she loves to read about Jesus and said that two ‘young fellow’ had stopped by a little while ago and left a pamphlet and said something about the Book of Mormon. She had to leave for the doctor though, so they didn’t have much time to tell her about it. She agreed to let the missionaries deliver her Bible and share a message about Jesus. It’s amazing to see how technology has opened the way for the gathering of Israel. We have also just started doing text/IM/chats with people who log on to mormon.org and want to know more about the church or have a question. It’s truly the Lord’s hand guiding His work, to see missionaries-in-training in Provo Utah, changing lives and bringing the gospel to people in Florida, Connecticut, and countries around the world!


5/21/07
Last night was our second Sunday devotional. In the first devotional, President Heaton spoke on repentance. This last Tuesday, Glenn L. Pace from the Seventy spoke on our potential as children of God and for spiritual power. Something interesting he shared was that he thought it might be possible that lack of spiritual confidence is a bigger problem than lack of humility in the missionary force. Another point from his talk that struck me was that the point at which a person whom the Lord has prepared will cross your path, is very likely to be at the time you are least willing to talk or teach with them. It is at that point when you must choose, either let the mind and body win, or give yourself to the spirit and let the Lord win.


In last night’s devotional, President and Sister Madsen spoke about doing the little things and staying on the missionary train. President Madsen related the story of Naman, who was commanded by a prophet (through a messenger) to bathe in the river Jordan seven times. He was ready to do something great to be cleansed, but doubted when asked to do something so small. The messenger called this out and he repented, washed, and was made clean. Pres Madsen talked about the importance of obeying those small commandments, and how few of us are ever asked to do something great or huge for the Lord. We find happiness in receiving continual blessings and increased portions of the spirit as we follow the simple commandments. Sister Madsen talked about staying on the missionary train.


5/27/07
The days have been running short, fast, and all together this week. Elder Kaye had some questions about Christ’s life, particularly growing up, which prompted me to read some out of Jesus the Christ. And from that I decided to reread the whole book now that I can understand it (as opposed to when I first read it at about 14, 15, or 16). In addition to that, I’ve set a goal to read the entire old testament by Thanksgiving. I need to read 6 pages a day to reach the goal. So journal writing has slipped in daily priority, especially as each day is of equal significance in language learning and spiritual nourishment. Although yesterday, our third Saturday, I felt like I had a breakthrough in the language. After asking questions in Russian in the TEC (to Seth) I was able to fairly accurately understand his responses. And as we planned an outline of our LRC lesson, I just felt so much more comfortable forming sentences than even that morning. I think that as I better grasp and memorize the principles of Russian grammar, particularly declinations, conjugations, and case pronouns, the easier the language will come. And as those principles become natural, I think my vocabulary will increase exponentially. Especially because so much vocabulary will come in the mission field, if I have the grammatical tools and structure to use the words, I will remember them more easily.


Another event of significance that happened just earlier today is the new assignment Elder Burgess and I have been given. The branch president asked us if we would be the new zone leaders. Two and a half weeks in and already overwhelmed by a position we still know nothing about. We’re supposed to receive instruction this whole week from the current zone leaders, so we’ll see how we do.


Tonight was an extremely marvelous devotional given by Brother Steve Allen, the managing director of the missionary department of the church. He talked about how Satan will push our buttons, like the drinking fountains at church (slightest change of pressure to squirt you in the face) and cause us grief. He also talked about how our missions will have some of the highest highs and lowest lows of our lives -- and I made a comparison of that to Christ’s life, how he experienced the highest highs and the lowest low. Bro Allen also talked about sacrifice, and what we’ve sacrificed to be missionaries. I’m still pondering on what my privation (volunteered sacrifice) is… and I’ll leave a space until I know what that is -- (added on 5/14/08) my will -> the only thing we really have to give God that isn’t his in the first place!


6/2/07
What am I grateful for today?
* My companion, Clint Burgess
* Example of older district presidents
* Sundays
* The Book of Mormon
* Bro Wilson (our teacher)


6/3/07
First fast Sunday in the mission and definitely the most recognizable as far as seeing and feeling a difference. That feeling the added portion of the Spirit that I prayed and fasted for and as I continue to pray I know I will develop a more keen sense of recognizing the spirit, because I have been doing my best to follow the promptings I am now receiving and because the Lord will bless me as I strive to fulfill the calling he has asked of me.


I wanted to share my testimony in testimony meeting today, but was constrained by both the spirit and the number of Elders who were bearing testimony for the last time (in a Sacrament meeting or in front of the whole branch) in the MTC. So many testified, in Russian, of the truthfulness of this work and of the restoration I want to record my testimony that I believe in a God of miracles. Several months before entering the mission field my roommate, Stephen Bolster, and I were participating in baptisms for the dead. In the foyer for waiting (the room w/all the benches) there was a copy of the New Era which was almost entirely devoted to preparing for a mission (practically, mentally, spiritually, etc.) Today, in Sacrament meeting, I remembered something a sister had said in one of the articles. The one thing she wished she had done differently was to expect more miracles. This is the Lord’s work and He has promised miracles (it’s His marvelous work, even miraculous work) if we but have the authority, power, and faith. The authority is there in the calling directly from an apostle of the Lord, the power comes in obedience to the presiding priesthood authority and studying of the scriptures (see Preach my Gospel). And the faith comes from the hope, the sure hope, in Christ’s redeeming Atonement, the study of His sacrifice, the prayer of sincerity and an unyielding trust in the Lord. His promises are sure, so if I do my part, the Lord will always, always do His (and a lot more than that!). This is His glory and His work. We are on His time and His hand is in everything. May we always remember that, and remember His Son, even Jesus Christ our Savior, in Jesus’ sacred name, amen.


6/4/07
Our district’s progression has come to the dip that we were warned about in our first days here. Brother Wilson shared w/us his feeling today, the spirit which gave him the same feeling in the city Smolensk. I am thankful for:
* The spirit
* My gifts
* DC
* TEC teachers
* Good lunches


6/5/07
That feeling was that the city was dammed. The progress was being kept back by something, he didn’t know what it was, but that the work eventually started to gain momentum and flooded. The same feeling is there with our district. Something has dammed us, and Bro Wilson encouraged us to begin a fast, not of bread & water, but from something else, whatever is keeping us from progressing. We are individually to fast from what the spirit directs. And I am fasting from Leviticus, that is… I have been reading the Bible from Genesis to Exodus to Leviticus, with a plan in place to read the OT from front to back by Thanksgiving. But I found out that the Lord has something else in mind. I was reading the OT for myself, not for the people of Russia or the Lord. I learned tonight that He would have me studying Isaiah, and so I began Isaiah 1 today. 


Elder Henry B. Eyring spoke at the Tuesday devotional tonight.
6/6/07
Taught our last lesson in English in the TRC tonight. 100% in Russian from now on. I feel like tonight was definitely not our best teaching night, especially in teaching by the spirit in Russian. I’m grateful for my companion’s testimony, the Russian language, obedient friends, obedient roommates, and a mission president who is prepared.


6/7/07
Record mail day today, 5 letters and a package, from Aaron, Ammon, Amanda, Dad, Aunt Debbie, and the package from Mom. From now on I’m only writing 3 things I’m grateful for, because of time.
1. Letters
2. Chocolate
3. Dried mango


6/8/07
1. Fruit snacks
2. Good people
3. Indoor plumbing


6/9/07
One month anniversary
1. Companion who will lead
2. Influence and promptings of the spirit
3. Josh Lemon


6/10/07
Elder Clint Burgess - Alpine, UT - companion (MTC)
First elder I met in the MTC, when he came to our room (I was first here). He’s played soccer for most of his life, plays the piano, is learning Russian very well, and has dreams of himself as a figure skater.


He’s a natural leader, as manifest by his call as district leader for our district, District D in branch 9, and call to serve as a zone leader (a companionship call, so we are the zone leaders). Although we have our differences in both personality and leadership styles (he tends to show his emotion more and get deeply involved, while I prefer to take a step back and work with what I see as a bigger perspective). Since he has more experience (as far as a district leader for a few weeks) he kind of picked up the torch from the old zone leaders. I had some trouble with that to begin with, it was Elder Burgess & Taylor, and everyone spoke to him when they needed to speak to the zone leaders. But I think I’ve realized how the Lord is blessing me now. He understands what capabilities I have and what I can do, with His help, in helping His work. After all, is He not anxious for me to become involved in it? The recognition of men was what I sought, and in my pride I longed for someone to acknowledge me as a zone leader… all in the pride of a haughty 19 year old who thought a patriarchal blessing mis-interpretation was justification for an ungodly attitude.


I have things to learn from Elder Burgess, and I’m starting to learn them. What a great opportunity to serve with a companion equally firm in the faith and ready to serve, and probably better prepared.


Another use of the Melchizedek Priesthood as Elder Burgess and I gave Elder Jayson Kyle Gilling a blessing before he enters the field (tomorrow @ 4am). Elder Burgess acted as voice and both the power and authority of the Lord were present to touch him and comfort him. How grateful I am that I have always lived worthy to the priesthood which I hold and that I am clean enough for the Lord to use as an instrument!


6/14/07
Very busy w/zone leader responsibilities, especially at night after we return from the classroom (interviews, checking out all the missionaries from older districts, etc.) We are now the older ones, next Wednesday we even have greenies coming in (we’re, as zone leaders, their first tour guides). Elder Uchtdorf spoke this last Tuesday, FINALLY! I’ve been calling it the whole 5 or 6 weeks we’ve been here (this Sunday is the halfway mark). Elder Uchtdorf was amazing!
1. Lil bro
2. Older bros
3. Examples of older bros


6/15/07
Another great day at the MTC today. Earlier this week, especially around Tuesday (after devo w/Elder Uchtdorf) and Wednesday I was having some problems with my attitude towards my companion. But I think I finally realized what I was doing, wallowing (as we have been instructed not to do in one of our devotionals, Glen L. Pace) and I was whinging in my head and spirit. It was starting to put a strain on our companionship, I was building a wall w/my pride. But with the help of the spirit, some rebuking from the Lord, and the Russian language, things are definitely on the up.


We’ve basically gone SYL (speak your language) now, with exceptions when studying spiritual things we can’t quite express in Russian and in the temple. We try the best we can and I definitely think it has helped our companionship as we try and speak more to each other and try to learn together.


I’m making a goal tonight that i am going to hold myself to and have the Lord hold me to. During my phone call home on Christmas, I want to be able to speak with Seth only in Russian. I know that at 5 months, with a good plan and several smaller goals, a lot of practice, and even more of God’s help, I can make it.


One of the rebukes that God gave me actually came through a letter from Seth. Interesting too that he meant it as encouragement. He just reminded, or taught, me that missionary work is all about love. Love for the Lord, love for the people, love for yourself, and love for the other servants of the Lord, most especially your companion. I was not loving my companion. I was comparing and finding fault and it was affecting my spirit. I was reminded of the scripture that if you love not your brother, how can you say you love the Lord? Let’s just say w/some of the Lord’s grace, I love my companion now. And I’m doing what I can to strengthen that and fill my heart with love for him, the Lord, Jesus Christ, and His work.
1. Cross-references
2. Cookies
3. Mormon tabernacle choir


6/17/07
It’s nice to get some personal time on Sunday, time for a short nap and time to try and catch up on journal writing. I had two interesting experiences in the referral center this week. 


On Tuesday, before the devotional with Elder Uchtdorf, I had a chat with someone who first asked about the doctrine of the trinity and why we don’t believe that, and then about some scriptures from the Book fo Mormon taken completely out of context (excerpts from sections with the leader of the Gadianton robbers speaking). I was about to end the chat because he obviously wasn’t openly seeking to know about the church when he revealed himself as a church member impersonating as a Bible basher. “Congratulations, you passed” he typed, “I was just bored and decided to have some fun.” Perhaps the Lord was teaching me patience… I simply replied ‘thank you for your time, remember to tell your friends about this feature.” It was hard not to respond ‘congratulations, you just wasted 15 minutes of the Lord’s time’ but that was inappropriate.


The other experience was with a chat on Thursday. His opening question was whether or not the church has ever taught that blacks are the descendents of Cain and are cursed. After trying to answer as correctly and carefully as I could, he strongly let me know I was a liar and wanted to know what else I was going to lie to him about. My first response was to laugh, I couldn’t see how someone could seriously go onto our church’s website and tell me what I believed… but after thinking a little and getting encouragement from Bro Wilson and Bunnel (they thought I would take it a lot harder than I really did), I felt bad, sorry that someone could be so confused as to feel the need to attack our church.


A good thing that came out of the experiences though was a scripture Brother Wilson shared with me how the Savior answered the hypocrites and Pharisees who sought not truth. Although they asked a question and the Savior taught them perfectly, and said exactly what they needed to here, they still rejected him. Something important to remember on my mission, that even when I teach with spirit, the message may not be received. That isn’t my fault, nor the spirit’s, it’s the fault or the choice of those who choose not to hearken unto the word.


Yesterday we had an amazing experience for the evening shift with Brother Wilson. He really truly is an inspired teacher. We spent the whole time from about 6 to 8:45, contacting and setting up appointments (for later that night) to teach lessons to people. We went about the first hour contacting, taught 3 or 4 short spiritual messages/lessons, basically highlighting the principles we felt we should share and testify of. We also set up 3 appointments to teach later that night. We prepared for the lessons in between our contacting & teaching time. With Elder Bagley and his companion, we testified of the restoration, and how it is the most important message we can bring. We talked about how God has been preparing us, and no one else can do what He has prepared for each of us to do. We committed them to read JSH 1:1-20 and Moroni 10:3-5, and to pray to know that Joseph Smith was a prophet and to know if the Book of Mormon is true. They accepted, and we both felt like we taught by the spirit. But we didn’t have time to talk about it because our next appointment was at 8, so we hustled to the laundry room. Elder Shipley, who we taught, had just gone back to his room, so we went there with some elders from his district and taught the three of them (Elder Shipley, Lakes, and companion), but the lesson was for Elder Shipley.


I had the spirit give to my mind the comparison of us as missionaries to the prophets. They and we received the word of God, both commanded to preach repentance unto the people, both teach with authority and power from God, both teach with the spirit, and both are either accepted or rejected. Even Christ, who taught exactly to the needs of his listeners, was rejected. So we should not expect that just because we teach w/the spirit and are worthy and speak good Russian, that our success is from their accepting it. Their agency gives them the chance to choose and the choice is not always a reflection of your worthiness, spirit, or ability.


6/18/07
Another solid day here in the MTC. Today I spent some time really thoroughly setting individual goals, and already I feel much better about my use of MDT (Missionary directed time). When you pray and know that your goals are right in the sight of the Lord, you can know you are doing right in achieving and working towards those goals, and you can be confident in your work and in accounting to Him and He will help you.


Tomorrow is P-day… temple, email, shoe shining and a whole lot of individual study & 2nd lesson practice!


6/20/07
Things I am grateful for:
1. Elder Baysinger
2. New missionaries
3. Cinammon rolls


6/21/07
Really great day! Everything went really well today. Had a great experience in the RC again (Bible, no missionaries… but she wrote down nearest church address). When I am doing what the Lord wants, He helps me so much. I love this work!
1. Aaron
2. Obedient elders
3. Apostles


6/22/07
Another great day, learning more Russian (verbs of motion), learning scriptures (Moroni 7:47), and learning more how the Lord wants me to be working. So grateful for the chance to be alive and chance to be serving a mission!
1. Sister Zakhaiko
2. Topical guide
3. Friends


6/23/07
Saturday is a special day, it’s the day we get ready for Sunday!
1. My pillow
2. New roommates
3. Elder Berlin


6/27/07
A different elder is writing tonight, the spirit has been doing a lot of teaching in this last week and I’ve been doing a lot of learning. The mission president’s seminar has either ended or will end tomorrow. Not only did we have the chance to meet and talk with President & Sister Kranney, but we heard from President Monson on Monday morning along w/Elder Scott. Then, on Tuesday, we had Elder Holland speak w/ Elders L Tom Perry, M Russell Ballard, Richard G. Scott, Henry B. Eyring, Dieter Uchtdorf on the stand.


6/29/07
Great day, not enough time!
1. Letters from friends
2. Piano players
3. Cookies


6/30/07
Perhaps the last 30th I’ll write in the MTC?
1. Elder Jarmin
2. Elder Slezak
3. Elder Baysinger (tie)


7/1/07
I’ve been thinking a lot lately, but much more than that… I have been feeling a lot more. The devotional on Tuesday with Elder Holland was a truly miraculous experience. I sang in the choir and we sang an amazing arrangement of ‘Joseph Smith’s first prayer’ that brought the spirit with such power. Elder Holland spoke about the Atonement, and I’m not exactly sure what he said about it, but I know what I felt. It was the same feeling I can remember from the end of my Sophomore year. That change within the heart that cannot be confined by words. Although it does remind me of King Benjamin’s address, Mosiah 4:2. It’s definitely something that I’ve not felt often, but I am striving now to always keep it in mind and in my heart. It gives so much more meaning to everything we are doing here. It is driving me to always keep Christ not only in my thoughts, but in my heart. I am definitely feeling, recognizing, and understanding on an entirely different level His love and sacrifice.


But it wasn’t only that experience at the devotional with attributed to this change in heart. That same day, Tuesday, June 26, was our last time at the temple. I was thinking about Christ a lot more through the endowment session and afterwards. And the last verse of ‘How Firm a Foundation’ was going through my mind. I made a covenant there, which I will never forsake and this entry will serve as a reminder. The Lord really is a God of miracles, but as Brother Miller taught us this week, there must be a miracle inside you before you can perform the miracles he has in mind for others.


Another thing that really contributed to that change this week was Brother Miller teaching (substituting) for Sister Zahajko. We do love Sister Z., but I learned a great deal from Brother Miller. To personalize a message, it’s not just for the investigator, it’s for you. You should adapt the lesson to you, your experiences, your feelings, and that realness, that genuine heartfelt teaching will both earn their trust and bring the spirit. And that’s what I’m working on now, personalizing the message to me… and then to the investigator. I can’t wait until July 25!


Another event of import this week, President Nally was released as our branch president. He and Sister Nally have been called by the Brethren to be in some position which is the go-between for mission presidents and the Quorum of the Twelve as far as missionary issues are concerned (a mission president does not have the authority to send a missionary home). They are going to serve in the Australia, New Zealand, South pacific area, starting the same week as we leave the MTC. Our new president is President Madsen, who I come to find out is the father of the one and only mad-dog Mark Madsen!
1. God’s love
2. Sacrament
3. Chicken Cordon Bleu


7/2/07
1. Elder Holland
2. My district
3. MTC


7/3/07
Great devotional tonight from Cree L. Kofford, emeritus seventy member about prayer. Afterwards, in district devotional review, we had a good discussion on what the spirit taught each of us and what personal chances/goals would result from this experience. Then we talked about what we can do to better bring the spirit as we pray as a district, and what we should do in order to have more spiritual & effective prayers. We decided on setting aside a few seconds before and after the prayer, while on our knees for pondering, and also to refrain from closing our hymn books early and then putting them away after the prayer. Our district responded accordingly and our district leader thanked us. And I just thought about contrasting that with the way Shae approached prayer in our Elder’s quorum meetings (in Freshman ward at BYU)... offering candy to who remembered what was said. One way worked, the other didn’t, but the intentions were the same… something to ponder.
1. District
2. Elder Jensen
3. Nieces (Paige, Marinda, Hallie)


7/8/07
Life is good! Two and a half weeks until the real work begins! I realize I know so very little Russian, but also understand there is a point when only engagement in the work fo the Lord will bring what is needed. I feel like I am ready to go to Russia this week, and Bro Wilson thought we were ready (our district) last week. We begin SYL this week, which will be really exciting to have a change. I feel like we have been preparing for so long, and that the time has come to put our preparations to the test and rely wholly upon the grace of the Lord. We’ll probably get our flight plans this Friday, which will make the last week and a half incredibly difficult as far as focus goes. I’m reminding myself even now that every verse I study or any inspiration or prompting I receive is for a specific person in Russia. A drunk man I will drag out of the road, or a little girl in an orphanage.


When I start to get distracted, or lose focus, that is what I’m trying to think about, that and the covenant I’ve made as a representative of the Lord Jesus Christ, both as a missionary and a holder of His priesthood.


It’s amazing to see the difference in our district & companionship in the last few weeks. Especially as each of us is more filled with love for the Lord, love for His work, and love for each other. It really does make it so much easier to be excited about the gospel, and so much easier to smile! :) 


7/10/07
Another ordinance performed by the power of the Melchizedek priesthood last night. My companion wanted a blessing of comfort. He wasn’t exactly sure why, but he felt that he needed one. I again was voice and Elders McLeod and Englehorn also placed hands upon his head.


7/14/07
Flight plans yesterday. Salt Lake to NYC to Moscow, one and a half hour layover in NYC, hopefully we’re not late coming in from SLC. We leave in 10 days or so.


7/19/07
Last night in the TRC last night, last time cleaning toilets in the TEC, last Thursday in the MTC. I believe the countdown has officially begun.


I don’t know what it was, but I think last night was the first time I’ve borne a pure testimony in a teaching situation. As we taught the second lesson, mostly just about the plan itself and the Atonement, I was really testifying of what the plan means to me… not what I thought our investigator needed or what we planned. And as I did, scripture after scripture came to my mind, and as I shared the spirit was stronger and stronger (Moroni 8:26, John 3:16-17, DC 59:16, Mosiah 2:41) and as I taught, I couldn’t help from smiling. Even this morning, walking to the breakfast line for sack breakfast, I was smiling at people, and most people know I’m not exactly a morning person. I think that’s just a taste of what can happen to me and to those I teach in the mission field. I think Mosiah 2:41 is my new favorite verse from the Book of Mormon, the gospel is the good news! Christ said on numerous occasions, be not afraid, be of good cheer. It’s the plan of happiness, look at President Hinckley, Monson, Elder Uchtdorf… always smiling!


Last Sunday was a big milestone for me as far as the language goes. The first time I couldn’t think of a word in English, in an interview with President MAdsen, I could only think of the word ‘okryg’, and not district. Next up, Russian dreams!


7/21/07
Yesterday was our last scheduled visit in the RC. I talked w/3 people. The first had not yet watched the ‘Finding Faith in Christ’ video, but said he would that night (Carlos). The lady I spoke with next wanted a video because of a commercial (always best when a commercial airs in the south), but couldn’t have the missionaries because of the part of Birmingham she lived in. She said it wasn’t safe for them, too much killing, so she’d not want to put them in that position. Then the last call I had was a call from the same commercial, and the most memorable of all. James told me he saw the commercial and couldn’t get to the phone fast enough. He told me how at one point in his life he had a shovel in his head, but the Lord had saved him for a reason. Apparently he was a drug dealer at the time, but he was still doing good for people too. He said if anyone was ever in need of money for rent or something, he was willing to give it w/o expecting it back, while other people were too ‘big time’. So the Lord let him know something was wrong… shovel in the head… but that he was still wanted to do good… not dying from the shovel to the head.


He is now 55 and has 9 daughters & 15 sons (that’s what he said, but seemed a lil slow when I talked with him) and he was happy to have the missionaries deliver the ‘Finding Faith in Christ’ video. Only on one condition though, that they come when he is home, because he wakes up and the makes his breakfast and he eats, and then he goes, but sometimes he’s home, like he was then (10:30am). He was all crazy, but it was an awesome experience.


7/22/07
Last Sunday in America for a little while. We were officially replaced as zone leaders today by Elders Delamare and Weston, and we sang a musical number (an arrangement of ‘Nearer my God to Thee’, which Elder Baysinger made) and had our departure interviews with President Madsen


7/26/07 - Ramenskoe: Zack Strong
I am officially a missionary now, we arrived in Moscow this morning around 10:30, after leaving the MTC at 5am yesterday morning. We got our bags unloaded, something to eat, and then visited Red Square and did some contacting, so that was my first experience with real Russian people. The metro is apparently a good place to talk to people, although I will admit I was too scared today. During our contacting time around Red Square (it’s illegal on the square, you must be 200 yards from a Russian Orthodox church). We gave directions to church & information about English classes to two men (both named Dima). On the way back to President Kranney’s home, a woman wished me ‘great success’, which was a good pick me up. But then, when we were returning on the bus from the metro, I tried to talk to a man about English classes and he ignored me, but a man across the aisle heard me and was drinking. He went to one of the APs, someone he knew would understand him, and went off. He took a Book of Mormon and threw it out the doors at the next stop, tried to steal a nametag (Elder Belov’s I think) and was grabbing Elder Burgess, trying to start something. Interesting end to the first day, but who knows, maybe someone will be interested in the book they saw thrown out of a bus. I realized today more than ever, the language is going to take a lot of help from God and a lot of patience & diligence on my part.


Life, missionary life, is going to be a lot more different than missionary life in the MTC, that’s for sure.


We came by flight from SLC to NY to Moscow. In SLC, we talked with a couple from Virginia who had toured temple square and the conference center while in Utah. They were open, although they didn’t take a Book of Mormon.


On the flight from NY to Moscow, I sat with a young man named Matt who was going to Russia for a month to teach the son of fairly wealthy parents English. We discussed religion, and he clearly defined himself as a diest or atheist. He explained to me how he has to see things, and if he had a sign, he would believe in religion. He turned down my offer of just trying to read and pray about the Book of Mormon (honestly, he said he probably would throw it away). But we talked about things and I was still friendly with him. Who knows, maybe there’s a seed planted now, and maybe something will happen that will cause him to search and he’ll remember that which I taught him. 


New goal to say my personal prayers in Russian.


7/27/07
Met my trainer today, Elder Strong. I’m serving in Ramenskoe, where the people seem more open than Moscow, in my opinion. But it’s 11:30pm right  now, 100% obedience!


7/28/07
On the train and preparing to perform a puppet show about not smoking. I feel like we’re incredibly unorganized right now, but that’s probably just because my companion has been in Moscow for this week and this puppet show is really eating up an entire Saturday. We’ll return and probably only have time to make some contact phone calls to set up teaching appointments for next week before English club and then ping pong. Apparently, we play about 4 times a week.


I have a concern about how when Elder Strong and I came to our apartment, we saw Elder Flake and his companion without name tags, wearing street clothes. Elder Flake had just finished playing tennis with somebody, but yesterday wasn’t P-day. Well, we’ll see later. Maybe English club will prove otherwise, I hope.


We’re returning from Dubna right now. I thought this day was trash, because we were in the train all morning, and then we waited for some people to come pick us up to take us to the place we were supposed to perform our puppet show. Maybe a full hour there at the train station in Dubna.


7/29/07
But after our pitiful puppet show on the stage during Dubna’s birthday, the rotary club invited us to a lunch / dinner in the cafe Laguna in Dubna. They showed us some of the sites of the city; a Mig 25 monument, a church modeled after the ancient Russian Orthodox church in Smolensk, and another church where the two rivers meet. Then we ate. The whole thing was a big success, because it put our church in contact with many important people from cities like Dubna (we shook hands w/the mayor) and from Moscow (Pavel, the man who drove us around is the general manager of a pharmaceutical company in Moscow). As the senior missionaries were telling us afterwards, we opened a lot of doors and opportunities for the church here.


As we were waiting for the express to Moscow, in Dubna, we spoke with a man named Dima. We talked about English, he knew quite a bit from studying in college. We let him know about the church and Book of Mormon and we gave him a pamphlet to read about our church and an English club flyer.


7/30/07
First real day, and feel like we did maybe half as much as we could have. We didn’t talk to someone about the church until maybe 5:30pm, although we did sign board for English club for an hour! We went to the supermarket, and McDonald’s and back home without speaking with a single person about our message. I’m a tad pessimistic right now, but I just feel we are wasting opportunities, time (we sat in the apartment at least a full hour today calling/re-planning), and the image of the church (separating ourselves by speaking too much English). We’ll see, good night!


7/31/07
First lesson in a sit down setting today. We taught Dima and his friend, but they came with some others who didn’t know how to act. That is, in a nutshell, kids. We should see them around, probably tomorrow night, and we’ll need to set up another appointment. Elder Strong and I didn’t schedule another meeting with them, but we will.


Apparently Elder Strong has had 2 companionship inventories his whole time in the mission, but that will change in the next few days. I need to talk to him about some things; planning, cruise control, our call, who we are, who we represent, time in the apartment, many things. But I think all the problems come from maybe one or two sources… we’ll see.


Miracle of the day: Although we didn’t visit English club, Elder Flake told us that 20 people came, and that a few want to find out more about our church! One lady wants us to meet her son before sports day on Saturday. I hope that we can create a pattern which will include many more miracles as we learn how to become better missionaries and how to work with the spirit. Good night!


8/2/07
I have to write about yesterday. First P-day in the field. We went into Moscow at 8am and we were in Moscow until 4pm. We played American football (Yay! NOT). In my opinion spent too long there. We went shopping when we came back, it was about 10 past 6 in the evening when we got home, and didn’t start contacting until 7:15 or 7:30. We passed out some English flyers and talked to a few people about our church, those who didn’t ‘No, No’ us. I’ve made it a goal to talk to 5 people today (on the platform, in the train, wherever - doesn’t include contacting). So I’ll report on that tonight. I’m not feeling much progress in the language, and I think part of that is from not speaking with people and also not setting a language study plan or goals. I’m going to work on that.


Miracle of the day: When we went into a store for food, a grandma said ‘thank you’ and in a nutshell, thanks for dressing nice and being good youth. It was nice to have someone smile at us for once, instead of us just smiling at them. Kind of a solid reminder from the Lord that things we talked about in the MTC and things from Preach my Gospel really are true (people will notice your spirit and recognize you as disciples of Christ). Still loving my companion, trying to love the people, and doing my best to help everyone around me, but I think it might be time to rely a little more on the Lord.


District meeting today, met Elders Sergeyev and Gavrilov for the first time. Good people and missionaries! I wish I was a native speaker, but just need to have patience and diligence.I talked with 3 people randomly on the train today, passed some smiles and more ‘hellos!’ than usual. We also help an older man who had fallen face first down (not sure why, probably something to do with alcohol). The train ride home was awesome. I asked a man how to pronounce some words, but he thought I just wanted to share a verse. He went off about the Bible, asking if it was that, I explained about the Book of Mormon, and he just recited Pushkin and another poet to me until he forgot and took a smoking break. Then a man came into the car & played the accordion and it was sweet.


FHE was really good tonight. We had Katya and her son stop by to tell us they wouldn’t be at sports day, and she ended up staying for the whole time, listening to Elder Strong give a spiritual thought and playing fruit-basket upset.


Miracle of the day: In the train, talked with a man, accordion, and a lady who was scared to talk to me when I asked ‘what kind of instrument is that?’ In order to learn how to say accordion! That trip made my day so much better.


8/3/07
Friday! Finally studied the whole time this morning. Didn’t have to go anywhere, etc. Then we contacted until 1pm, and then had a good weekly planning. We talked about Denis & Artyom & Maria & Ivan; all close to baptism, especially Maria and Ivan. And we might have a new investigator this week. Dima and maybe his mom, and Katya and her son (14 years old). But we aren’t teaching them right now, just English club and FHE. Also, we have a meeting with a man, Yura, and we hope that he remembers because we can’t speak with him because when we call, he doesn’t answer. We’ll see. There are problems with Elders Flake and Woodward (Elder Flake is now senior companion & Elder Woodward can’t use the phone, because the problem has to do with Sister missionaries, but we’re praying for them.


Miracle of the day: A man who didn’t believe in God, smiled the whole time we talked to him. I told him ‘I like how you smile, in my opinion, too many people have forgotten how to smile!’


8/4/07
My first sport’s day, and the heavens cried (rain) and my first English club. Katy didn’t come and Dima didn’t come, but good day because we taught Valera about the Book of Mormon and he promised/committed to pray about the book. We received a contact from a man, his name is Garik… an Armenian… man we met today. That is, after Elder Strong talked with a man who said that he didn’t believe in Christ, but that he believes in Allah, but Elder Strong was not happy and we lost the spirit. So we prayed and later met Garik! We scheduled a meeting with Yura, but he didn’t come and somebody besides him answered the phone, and we don’t know how we can talk to him if that’s not his #. Sometimes, it happened, but we will strive to meet w/him. Beef & rice w/veggies (onions, peppers, ketchup) tonight.


Miracle of the day: We didn’t have the Holy Ghost, but I prayed and maybe 10 minutes later we found Garik on the street! ‘Of course, man’ was his response to ‘do you believe in Christ?’ He wants to know more about him. Maybe Denis and Artyom will come to church tomorrow.


8/5/07
First fast Sunday out in the field… and I forgot it was fast Sunday until 10:30 last night. I failed my goal at church to shake everyone’s hands, partly from fear and lack of effort and also from everyone coming late and leaving early. We’re going to meet with President Yeger this week to get a list of branch members (active & inactive) and callings and also try to see what we can do to help him or help anyone in the branch. Right now there isn’t much trust between the members and the missionaries, and we’re going to start with the branch president to get that fixed.


Went contacting after church today. We got one contact, Victor. Talked to a few drunk people. Time for a hot dog.


Miracle of the day: During Priesthood, I led the music and I thought “I’m leading music, in the second story of a paint store, in priesthood, in Russia”


Nick, the man we met on the street in Zhukovski, talked about God. He’s very religious and told us that we can’t talk about Jesus Christ because He’s too holy. But we gave him an invitation and continued to say ‘air, air, we can’t say…’ and his eyes got real big. It was a lot of fun to talk to him.


8/6/07
Monday, I talked with 13 people today, fulfilled my goal there. But everything isn’t great yet, staying up at 10:30pm. I wish I could take more pictures, but I know the rule in the white Bible about how we can’t take pictures while we Preach the Gospel. Maybe P-day will require a trip around Ramenskoe and then my family can find out more about my mission and especially about my area. Things appear to be very good this week. We’re finding people (slowly, but they are being prepared I believe) and our branch should have a few baptisms soon. With Zhenya this week, Maria and Ivan when we can meet with them and maybe Denis and Artyom, if we even meet with them ever again. We also want to meet with PResident Yeger this week and work more with Church members and find out how we can better serve our branch. I hope that meeting can help us know our branch and help the church members help us.


Miracle of the day: Dima has already read up to Mosiah 5 and his mother has almost finished the Book of Mormon. We’ll see him tomorrow, probably on the street, and we’ll schedule another meeting with him, and probably with his mother as well. They are interested, but we will teach them about prayer next time, so they can know how to find out about the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon.


8/7/07
Evgeny wasn’t there today, so we think that he isn’t sincere. But we got a contact right after we left the church building. Ruslan for tomorrow. Went on splits with Elder Woodward after dinner because Elder Strong needed to interview Zhenya for baptism, but he never showed. So they will tomorrow morning. That’s why we’re sleeping in Lubertsy tonight. Anyway, while Elder Woodward and I were walking from the station, we met a man we started talking with who I thought was someone else. We walked and he invited us over and started hailing and as we got to our building I realized who he was (a man in our building who Elder Strong had mentioned met with the missionaries before, and is gay, and apparently kissed Elder Sergeyev, so said Elder Woodward.


He wanted us to come into his apartment, but Elder Woodward helped us get out of it, and we went to our building to prepare for English club, and he followed us there. He said some things I didn’t understand, got mad at us for not understanding, left and came back when Elder Strong and Flake got there. 


Miracle of the day: Ruslan, we met him right after Evgeny didn’t show, and we scheduled a meeting and got his number, but we don’t know if it will turn out to be the right number.


8/8/07
A little about Russia, different comparisons with America
* All tree trunks are painted white from 3 feet down
* Crosswalk symbols
* EVERYONE smokes
* Crosses all over the place
* Tattoos on the arm, especially crosses on the back of the hand below the webbing of the thumb and index
* Never seen so many mullets in my life
* Ground is so dirty
* Women forget to finish dressing most mornings
* People forgetting how to smile
* Unhappy children (children who aren’t crying, but aren’t smiling)
* So many drunk people (the stereotype? Fits)
* Getting rides in passenger vans like buses
* The market (in Moscow)


Today = p-day and we slept over in Lubertsy because Zhenya couldn’t be there yesterday for his interview. It was my first warm shower in Russia since the first one in President Cranney’s home, which felt so good. Next we went into Moscow and emailed, bought new shoes for Elder Strong at the biggest market in Moscow. Then we went to Sbarro’s across from McDonalds. Never again, because lunch cost more than 12 dollars (about 350 rubles, ridiculous). Right now doing splits with Elder Wirthlin in Khimki, he’s cool.


Miracle of the day: Kid in the metro, to whom I gave an English club flier, he’s cool and wanted to talk about God, but didn’t have time. But he was really sincere about it and I know he’ll come to English club.


8/9/07
Splits today, went with Elder Watkins, one of the APs and contacted Khimki. Long day… returned to Ramenskoe and family night for about 30 minutes, then did the shopping we couldn’t get done on P-day. We found a mafia front.


Miracle of the day: Concrete meeting with Maria and Ivan! Nadezhda called and tomorrow we have a 7pm and we’ll set a baptismal date!


8/10/07
Good morning w/regards to contacting. WE talked to a lot of people, 5 conversations for me, and we got two numbers we can call. WE already have reached our goal for contacts. Weekly planning today, Maria and Ivan couldn’t meet tonight. Elder Strong got very not happy, but he read his favorite verses and prayed so that we could have the Holy Ghost. We contacted until youth night, but no one came, like usual. No one came last week either. So, we visited the holy water next to the temple and Elder Flake got pics with some deer statues. I feel as though we didn’t use our time well then. Trash time to me… it’s the Lord’s time, why do we want to do that on His time? 


A good day, but I don’t feel that way right now, I listened to my companion instead of the spirit earlier, when I should have done something. I should have spoken to a man, but I didn’t follow the whispering and I lost the spirit for the rest of the evening. Thankfully, fortunately we didn’t talk to anyone after that, but I learned an important lesson; loyalty to the Lord and His spirit before loyalty to your companion. But, Zhenya’s baptism is tomorrow… it’ll be good to see some success. Continue to feel like we aren’t doing our best work, especially when we aren’t united.


8/11/07
Zhenya’s baptism today. It was our entire day… but I spoke w/only six people because I was scared and had an excuse (too loud, etc.) But tomorrow I will become better. I saw Eld McKay and Cannon at the baptismal service and they are doing well. Bad news from America, President Faust died today, but he is living in a better place now. I also saw a very drunk man in the train today and almost wanted to trip him, but I didn’t.


Miracle of the day: Ruslan called in the morning and wanted to meet on Monday or Tuesday (Old Ruslan) HE called!


8/12/07
Sometimes, working with Elder Strong is difficult. He has no patience and no love for the people here, especially w/regard to church members. Somehow I need to help him understand it, but he won’t understand when I try to address it during companionship study. I talk about how we should do something, for example, 100% obedience, but we continue to not go to bed before 10:30pm, we don’t even pray as a companionship before then either. But, I think there is a lot for me to learn from him (maybe about what not to do or something of the like).


Today, Sunday, Dennis and Artyom came to sacrament meeting! And Zhenya was baptized by fire and Mike came too. We had a meeting after church with President Yeger about how we can do better. I really want to understand everything everyone said, especially what the church members said, so that I can help and do what Elder Strong sometimes won’t do. We got a current list of church members and I hope that it will help. Another example, the zone leaders just called and asked that Elder Strong gather all the numbers for our district together [collectively report district statistics] and he became unhappy and started to ask ‘why?’ ‘stupid!’ It’s like when he expected church members to simply come to us and give us contacts/referrals. I think he doesn’t understand that we should earn their trust. It’s probably clear that I don’t have the best of feelings towards him right now. I need to get the spirit again, I’m trying… I’m trying…


Miracle of the day: Dennis and Artyom came to church today, although we aren’t good missionaries! We didn’t do anything this week… how do you say FRUSTRATED!?


8/13/07
Happy Birthday Amanda!


Monday, and as usual, we haven’t met with anyone, so we contacted all day, except for the 2.5 hours we took to eat lunch… in my opinion too long… but we almost fulfilled all of our goals: 2 contacts, 5 lessons, and 10 people who we talked to, but we didn’t meet with Maria and Ivan, but I finally did meet him (Ivan) on the street in Zhukovsky.


Also, it’s really refreshing to talk with honest people like those we talked with today. Two atheists who actually talked about what they believe and why, as opposed to the Russian Orthodox church and their members who simply say ‘No, don’t need it’ or ‘I’m Orthodox.’ Many open people today, and that was good.


Miracle of the day: We found salsa! Two contacts who, I think, honestly want to know more about our church.


8/14/07
Great day of contacting, we got two contacts in the morning and two men actually approached us and want us to meet with them about their company, something (not too clear), but it happened because we were smiling (for real, they said they saw us ‘smiling and thanks to our smiles, wanted to talk to us). We’ll see what happens with it, but it was cool! I think I feel like we are improving, but we can always continue to improve - like our English club. Today was better than yesterday.


Miracle of the day: We found 6 ruble ice cream across the street! I love it!


Contacting story:
2 guys talked to us today, got our contact info. They pulled off in their car and crossed the street to talk to us. They said something about their company and us do our thing and something else… we’ll see what comes from it, but they said they saw us smiling and it’s good to see someone smiling!


English club:
Spoke with a kid named Sergey, I want to teach next time and not just have a conversation with people who are boring. Elder Strong hates English club, but in my opinion, it’s because he doesn’t know how to teach it and he doesn’t want to use the guidebook we have, but I will!


8/15/07
P-day, and I think we need a change from our usual things. Elder Strong told me today that he’s never studied on Wednesday or Sunday… I thought ‘What!?’ He’s only done companionship inventory twice before I came, and now I find out he’s never studied on P-day? Something’s not right with that and if no one follows this rule (Elder Strong’s served with a lot of missionaries over the course of his year in the field), it means our mission goals are not safe.


8/16/07
Zone conference today, too rich to write in Russian. Again, we missed study time in the morning (like yesterday), but today was understandable because we had to be in Moscow by 10:45 for 11am zone conference. We missed the 8:45 train as usual (our first train), but only by about 30 seconds today. So we got the 9am and metro and all that into Moscow. We opened the conference with a new goal, each district coming up with their own number to achieve for sit down lessons in a week. A great goal, especially for our area, to give us a good way to work on more teaching opportunities (investigators, inactives, active members). Quite frankly, we did basically nothing last week. The theme of this zone conference was ‘the small & simple things’ and I’m very grateful for it. But I’m afraid some of the small and simple things (obedience, planning, conduct) have been ignored / forgotten / trampled / trodden upon (to use Nephi’s words). We talked about how to better work with members and the whole match = instrument analogy, and weekly and daily planning. I think Elder Strong took some of it to heart (I noticed a little bit of change in his behavior tonight). But we still have to see about any lasting effects. I’ll do my best to help our companionship and area become what it should be, a model for others in our district. Elder Woodward, Flake, Sergeyev, and Gavrilov are the rest of the district, and Elders Sergeyev and Gavrilov are first rate, not just because they are Russian. The missionary who knows the language and the people the best is the Holy Ghost, and he is in every companionship… or should be! If he’s not, do anything and everything to invite and accommodate him!


I talked with Elder Lemon, Berlin, and Jensen today, and I got the same sort of feeling from Elder Burgess as we briefly talked. The older missionaries are on coast. The whole mission, save some areas (hopefully Kazakhstan, and Zhelezny where Elders Sergeyev and Gavrilov are serving) are content with a sort of mediocrity. Following some of the rules, but choosing which are important. The desire and drive are lacking, especially for 100% obedience. I was hoping the elders from the MTC wouldn’t become like their trainers (if their trainers are like unto mine) and this might be bad to think, say, or write, but I felt like Alma today, discovering and rejoicing that ‘they were still my brethren in the gospel.’ We’re all patiently waiting out the transfer right now, helping how we can but learning like wise missionaries should (wise = learning from others’ mistakes). I actually got more excited than scared to know that we will probably be training by the 3rd transfer! The language, I need to look at in an Ether 12:27 light from now on. No more passive tag along junior companion and no more ‘I just got here three weeks ago, and I don’t speak Russian very well.’ There is a difference between humility and self handicapping.


Miracle of the day: Everything we were trained on or was talked about in zone conference addressed concerns I’ve been having (how to work w/members, missing small opportunities for service, the ‘little’ things, weekly and nightly planning, etc.) O, and Bishop Edgely from the Presiding Bishopric just happened to be in Moscow and popped in for a visit in the middle of President Cranney’s testimony. Just like the branch presidency of the MTC managed to do every week at district devotional review.


8/17/07
Weekly planning meeting today, and it was the first good one with regards to goal setting and how we can achieve them during the week. Elder Strong showed some changes. I hope it will continue, but I think that maybe he’ll lose his patience about our specialty, that is, that we never seem to be able to schedule meetings with people, contacts, investigators, or church members. Because no one will answer the phone.


We met w/Dennis and Artyom today and taught them prayer and the importance of prayer and the importance of studying the scriptures in order to know if the Book of Mormon is true. They said they will read 3 Nephi 11 and pray to God about the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon. They’re coming to the branch picnic tomorrow and hopefully also to sacrament meeting Sunday (like last week).


Besides that, it was a usual day. A few good conversations on the street, kind people, how rare!


Miracle of the day: hot water, finally!


8/18/07
Ward picnic today, it wasn’t bad, but we left our apartment around 10am and got back at 6pm… we bought 6 kilos of kebabs and other stuff in the morning and met up with the members at church at 11am. We didn’t leave the building till 12 noon and we got there around 1pm. Started to prepare the kebabs around 1:45pm and at the end, returned at 6 to do English club. It was my first time teaching and only Vera came. The older Elders didn’t help, just off-topic comments from Elder Woodward trying to be funny. Teaching English is harder than I thought. I don’t know how to teach grammar or how to make it fun and exciting. I need an example to understand what a good lesson looks like. It needs to be somewhere, not here in Ramenskoe, with those who hate English club or don’t work at it all. I think it happened to humble me (the bad lesson) and give me some trials (time for introspection tonight). And, I think we’ve strayed a little from zone conference, but didn’t say anything about it yesterday. We were good yesterday, but not today.


Miracle of the day: Dennis and Artyom and Artyom’s mom came to the picnic. I need to not be discouraged.


8/19/07
What am I thankful for:
* Patriarchal blessing
* Knowing that someday I will know the language
* Serving in Ramenskoe
* My companion understands Russian
* My companion isn’t discouraged, trunky, lazy, or junior
* Faith
* Hope
* Those who have gone before (here in Russia and missionaries in my family)
* Scriptures
* My companion’s testimony
* Russian ice cream
* President Cranney
* Preach my Gospel
* Elder Lemon
* Mom
* Seth
* Ammon
* Brandon
* Stephanie
* Sarah
* People who are nice enough to listen
* Paige
* Marinda
* Tasma
* Dad
* Aaron
* Amanda
* Fan in our house
* Knowing English
* Hymns
* Songs
* Smiles
* Sacrament
* Garments
* Temples
* Little kids


Sunday, as always, is a day of reckoning. Our lack of planning is made painfully obvious in the branch missionary meeting and our ineffective use of time is made apparent in our failing to meet or exceed any of the very attainable goals we have set. We’ll see how great our great planning session really was on Friday when it comes to fulfilling our plans and accomplishing our goals. I think our lack of progress may be in direct relation to our planning habits, obedience (bed time), and love for the people (or lack thereof). But to do my part, I’m going to be obedient tonight.


Miracle of the day: We talked with Dima, he read the whole Book of Mormon and said it was the most interesting book he’s read, seriously!


8/20/07
Good mini companionship inventory this morning about how Elder Strong doesn’t feel like a successful missionary, despite knowing everyone has agency and happens on the Lord’s time table. Basically, the only way, he said, he would feel successful is to be involved in a baptism. Zhenya was the first he’d seen, been involved in, or even been in the same district as since being in Russia. And his mission is half over. We talked a little about how I feel successful (planning/making lists and then accomplishing those goals and checking off the list) and it is in complete contrast with him. He hates the planner and planning in general. I guess President Monson was right when he said a mission is all about learning to get along with people, and I’ve got to learn these last few weeks instead of simply enduring. 


It’s hard though, just this morning we made a contact and gave Evgeny an invitation and then the next person we talked with happened to be of the Islamic faith, which is not a good thing when Elder Strong contacts. He proceeded with the usual, ‘you believe Jesus Christ was a prophet, right? And prophets can’t lie…’ full well knowing they don’t believe the New Testament to be correct. Elder Strong told me right after that argument, that during the argument, he had seen Evgeny throw away the invitation we had given him. Elder Strong said it was because he was talking to his wife, but I don’t think seeing us arguing with that Muslim man helped. A few times Elder Strong told me he has always wanted to serve in Kazakhstan, the first majority Muslim nation to be open to missionaries. I think I found out today why he hasn’t. In the next two weeks I’m going to do my best to do my duty, to cease to find fault and learn to regulate my affairs as Christ would have me, especially my relationship with Elder Strong. I’m starting to feel pride seeping back into my attitude, coming across as a ‘holier than thou’ attitude. Elder Strong confirmed that this morning. Time for more empathy and less criticism. Strengthening and encouragement instead of silent criticism and companionship study sermons. I realize I have become prone to the latter.


Finished off the day and I think Elder Strong is feeling pretty discouraged. Not much success after visiting Tatiyana. We contacted for a very long time today, especially when sometimes we didn’t have the Holy Ghost. I’m not sure how to help him, but I think the song he starting writing when he got home helped. We’ll see how tomorrow comes.


Miracle of the day: reached our contact, sit down lesson, and conversation goals; but still managed to receive some counsel / trials / lessons for ourselves. By the means of God’s will and the free agency of people.
Story:
Talked with a crazy guy who crossed himself weird, spit over his shoulder, and slapped the back of my hand after shaking it. Apparently he knows English, French, German, etc. and everything about history. Told me about Peter the First and the Baltics, how Alaska is really Russia, and more. Said he’d call us and set up a meeting.


8/21/07
Another normal day. I think for the sake of those who can’t read or understand Russian, I’ll start writing in English. Days with lots of contacting are not treating Elder Strong well. Today we had English club to fill some time, but that’s one of the problems. Right now it’s there to fill up time, we have only had 4, 1, 2 people come the last 3 times, and it isn’t quite the finding tool that I thought it was. Another meeting fell through today (Ivan) and I think that just added to the overall blahness feeling. I can feel and understand some of the discouragement which can come from missionary work without visible success or progress of the work. But I can also see where we aren’t doing everything we can to combat that or do more than we’ve done before. I just can’t see what I can do to help, so I’m just going to do my best, as an example, to pray for and seek to build up Elder Strong and stop focusing on ways he can improve and how i can tell him without offending him. I just realized that’s what I’ve been doing and it wreaks with pride and hypocrisy.


Miracle of the day: started writing down little inspirations and even only 3-4 to write, it’s more than I figured I’m receiving in a given day. Also, people can tell when you’d rather throw a rock at them for not wanting God, than crying for them.


8/22/07
Only two min. P-day, wrote home, bought groceries, bought air show tickets for Saturday. Good thing I’m watching my money so I could foot it for Anderson and some seniors to be paid back tomorrow. 


Meeting with Marta and Ivan fell through. Nadezhda couldn’t, but we will Friday. We played ball from 7:30 to 8:45, got back about 10:10pm (no no), but I think our companionship relationship is better now.


8/23/07
Today was a great day. We had district meeting and the APs came, after that (and after we ate cake and cookies) we did a blitz in Lyubertsy. I worked with Elder Gavrilov and learned a lot about how we should contact and he reminded me of why I’m a missionary. Love for the people!


It really was an eye-opening experience for me, and even trying to do my best to follow his example made our contacting tonight (with Elder Strong) so much more effective. Made my week basically!


Miracle of the day: Contacting with Elder Gavrilov, I think God really does work through other people and this was an answer to my prayers.


8/24/07
Weekly planning today. Did some contacting before that. I’m trying to be more sensitive to whom we should stop, but Elder Strong is one of those aggressive contactors who stops every male over 15 and under 170 if he is alone and not on the phone. Sometimes I think all we should do, for our sakes, their sakes, and the sake of the spirit, it’s best to smile, greet, and keep on walking. And I’m trying to change it up a little. I understand we need to teach the restoration, but a lot of people are open to hearing you testify of Christ than to testifying of a man or a book they’ve never seen, heard of, or thought about, much less read. When they understand how we revere Christ, I think they are more willing to listen to our other teachings. Teach about God and Christ on the street and His prophet, church, and scripture where they are more comfortable (street, park, meeting, phone, etc.)


Weekly planning was tough this week. We aren’t meeting our goals. Are the investigators where we are placing the fault. I think if we can show God we can handle and help the investigators we do have, He will trust us with more prepared people. As of right now, if I were Him, I don’t think I’d trust one of my prepared children with us. We need to start helping our current investigators progress, and then I think the work will flow and we’ll be able to meet with our contacts instead of missed meetings and wrong numbers! Very frustrating.


Spoke with a young man today, Dima in Ilinskaya. He was pretty disinterested at first, but we were going the same way, to the station, and I painfully managed to get his name, give him an English club flyer (he threw it away) and we let him borrow our cell. Later, he came onto the platform, and he sat by us, and on the train. I testified that I know Jesus Christ can help all people, and we gave him a Joseph Smith pamphlet to read. He looked over my Book of Mormon a little, but just couldn’t understand why we came to Ramenskoe Russia from America. I think he gained a lot more respect for us once we explained it wasn’t our work, we are volunteers, paying our own way. I hope that he reads and calls us! Oh yeah, airplane event/exhibition tomorrow, all day most likely.


Miracle of the day: Dima; on the road, on the platform, in the train (maybe God actually does know everything!)


8/25/07
We’re spending the night in Zhelezny dorozhony tonight, because Elder Strong had to do a baptismal interview with one of Elder Sergeyev and Gavrilov’s investigators.


We went to the MAKS airshow for basically all day (left home at 10am, left the show at 4pm). Did some contacting w/Elder Sergeyev and had some really good conversations where he let/made me testify and teach.


Oh yeah, and while we were in line for the airshow (70k people there today), President Cranney called and told me I’m being transferred to Kazakhstan next transfer! Elder Parker will be my companion. He’s only been out about 5 months, as I understand, same as Elder Wirthlin. Elder Burgess is going to be serving there with Elder Salsbury (DL) in Almaty. Pretty exciting, and also scary (language), but comforting too (trust from God and the mission president). I just don’t want it to affect me and make me trunky for Kazakhstan for the last two weeks of the transfer.


8/26/07
Sunday! But Maria, Ivan, Anya, Denis and Artyom didn’t come to Sacrament meeting. We’re going to meet with Maria and Ivan a lot this week, with or without Nadezhda, we need to meet with them often; not like we met with them earlier (maybe once a week). 


But we did have two random guys show up to church today and one stayed for the full 3 hour block. He doesn’t have a phone, but no job either, so he said he’s going to come to church from now on, so I guess he liked it! 


His name was Nikolai. It was a great meeting, good borscht, etc. Statistics were very poor this week, but I think if we really try to accomplish our sit-down meeting goal, we will be much more effective.


8/27/07
We came to Moscow this morning to get my visa for Kazakhstan. We met Elder Burgess and Elder Anderson there, in Moscow, and I should get my visa Wednesday when we come into Moscow for interviews. We took the ‘Sputnik’ back to Ramenskoe, and I realized that we’re really only 30 min east of Moscow if you’re take the fast train, and about 2 hours taking the normal one. Or at least it feels like 2 hours, without air conditioning and taking every single stop along the way.


Studied about keeping my intentions pure and in line with God. Building up the kingdom of God, like Joseph Smith’s purpose in translating the Book of Mormon. Can’t be for any kind of personal gain, recognition or blessing.


We met a man, Sergey, on the street who said he will come to English club and talk about his church (Russian Orthodox) and our church. We texted later and we’re meeting earlier tomorrow. Also the girl who called us (Anya) who is coming to English club, weird phone call (random, we don’t know who she is quite yet, called while we were eating our fresh bread covered w/chocolate and poppy seeds.


Met with Maksim in a park in Zhukovsky. Elder Strong lost it and walked off, saying when he really wanted to listen, he could call us. But I think Elder Strong isn’t really a people person and the language barrier (Maksim couldn’t understand us) and patience barrier (we were teaching a lesson, instead of teaching Maksim). But I walked w/Maksim and did what I could to ‘diffuse’ the situation. It reminds me of my experience with Dallin and Nick at the BYU creamery just past 11 o’clock with a policeman, with Rebecca and Kayla there. He said he’ll read the Book of Mormon, when he had slept first ( was really tired from work), but Elder Strong was saying ‘no, you should read it first, don’t need to sleep, need to read and pray first.’ Sometimes, I think if he just thought about what he’s saying in English, he would realize why people react the way they do.


Also visited Maria. We’re going again on Friday. This week feels a lot better than last week already. Sit down goal… here… we… come!


8/28/07
Tuesday, Tuesday, Tuesday… spent the day contacting, visited an orphanage in Buikovo to get a telephone # for Sister Brown (north of the tracks, a little west of the platforms). Really good pasta with ground beef, olives and tomatoes courtesy of Elder Strong. Contacting a little more and English club. The man we spoke with yesterday came, and as promised, brought a CD with the head priest of the Russian Orthodox church explaining why their church is Christ’s church. We didn’t get a chance to set up a meeting, but we have his digits and he’ll probably come to the picnic on Saturday. I think this ward picnic will be a good chance for people in the ward to fellowship others. Got a bunch of letters in the pouch, probably the last time for a while (hello Kazakhstan!) Shoe shining time.


Miracle of the day: Three contacts again!


8/29/07
P-day. Interview with President Cranney this morning. He told me a story about contacting, he talked to a man who was busy on his tractor, but President Cranney interrupted him, and in the ned, he was baptized (10 years later). But it was a good way to keep me from being critical of Elder Strong’s contacting style, battering ram with a teddy bear on the end. Basically the interview was to make sure I’m worthy and ready to go to Kazakhstan.


Then we played American football for a while, and my companion played with some other missionaries against a professional Russian baseball team. Picked up his package (Sokol was so serious) and had shawarma for the first time (SO GOOD!). Email, metro, train -> Gleb (got his contact, really cool guy, lives off Ilinskya, likes basketball, said he’d call us too. I owe Elder Lemon 40 rubles.


Miracle of the day: Bread and shawarma!


8/30/07
Normal day, unfortunately. My last district meeting in this district, with Elders Flake and Woodard (Lubertsy), Sergeyev and Gavrilov (in Zheleznadorozhny) and Elder Strong and myself (Ramenskoe). We met in Lubertsy and did a scripture chase (first time for Elders Sergeyev and Gavrilov, both from St. Petersburg). I think that our district is no accident, because of the opportunities I’ve had to learn from Sergeyev and Gavrilov and to learn from what I’ve seen with Elders Flake and Woodward.


Didn’t proselyte until 5pm, definitely I’m having the words of my patriarchal blessing weigh on me, but patience and humility are needed to keep unity in our companionship, a little more so than suggestions and reprimands.


FHE with Sasha, Aurika, and Nadezhda. I beat Elder Strong in chess. This is the kind of funk/routine I don’t want to fall into. Kazakhstan, here I come!


Elder Strong is a musician and has written over 900 songs. His musical mind has given me a little of a poetry itch.


Ghost runner on second
No road compares nor journey is
As the way which God requires
Of willing servants who pay their way
To submit to the refiners fire.


But in every step lies willing help
Despite the trials sore
The work is His, He knows the way
No one wants success more


The memories form as experience comes
Work has raised up a man
The language learned and culture known
He patiently watches sand
Dripping through an hourglass
As the grease has from the pan


The words slip out on patience’s back
His carelessness yields a mess
And yet he somehow does not understand
Why lives he cannot bless


With the same care he fills his time
Enduring to the end
Wishing for a better day
Not accepting upon whom that depends


The people he may have loved
But cannot remember when
Months of drunks and promised lies
Have broken, hardened any ties
That could have remained


And so he works as seems fit
In a land devoid of love
Excepted of the promises
God showers down from above


Content to limit the work to be done
To the words and power of his own tongue
Struggling to remember the Atoning One
The ghost runner rounds second
And only the batter seems to know.


Tears of a polluted heaven
The clouds can only endure that which the creator intended, the mist of a million mouths join in darkening the sky and the lungs in order to light the end of a stick. The heavens cry over Russia, and  Russia smokes in return.


The Lord pours out a storm to cleanse the air and clean the ground, but can only manage to pull the breath of alcohol to the sidewalk where the steps of a million men mix the mud beneath the bottle caps. The heavens cry over Russia, and Russia drinks in return.


The drops fall thin and long, slowing cars and driving men into buildings. Their minds are silent as their mouths defile the temples of their bodies. In His mercy, Father sends His ministers to help, and the mouths defame and defile the gospel of Christ. The heavens cry over Russia, and Russia cares not in return.


8/31/07
Weekly planning today, but not enough time for companionship inventory because we had to go to Maria’s. But when we got there, we found out that we weren’t allowed to meet because of something about neighbors and the police. So she said she’d be at church and she would call about meeting us after Ivan got back next Tuesday.


I’m afraid that today I caught a bad case of Kazakhstan trunkiness. Especially in setting weekly goals. I just didn’t feel like I cared all that much, not enough to try and help find ways to do better in the work. I feel like I have been really critical of Elder Strong, but now I am feeling like it’s not my problem anymore, which is a problem! It’s hard when you understand that, although the way you think it should be done might not be exactly right, you feel justified in thinking there are definitely improvements to be made, but you aren’t senior companion and suggesting those improvements, or even that improvements are needed, can make the relationship between companions a lot worse and drive out the spirit.


One thing I realized today, a big difference between Elder Strong and I is the locus of control. He has an external locus, while I am internal. Especially when it comes to missionary work; setting up meetings, people to church, people following through on commitments. I think a bigger problem is he either has forgotten, or never knew, how to love the Russian people (not just people who are nice to us) and is serving more out of duty and commandment from God than for love and desire to help the people here. It’s sad, really, maybe the Lord knows some way I can help!


9/1/07
Found out who is taking my place here in Ramenskoe, Elder Voligov from Latvia. Apparently he has a reputation and is the last person Elder Strong wants to serve with. I told him that the Lord is telling him something, but unfortunately (or maybe for the better) it looks to be like a really hard transfer for him. Elder Flake is training (it’s only his third transfer… apparently we are the youngest mission force in the world!) and I found out that I leave Tuesday night, so Monday is my last day in Ramenskoe. At least for a while, I wonder if I won’t come back here as a trainer or senior companion, when I understand the language and can do a lot more to help people.


I feel bad, I won’t say regret, because I feel as though most missionaries are overwhelmed when being trained, or proud and clashing with companions or mission life, etc. Or a fireball to get people excited (included trainer), but I am none of those. I think I know/knew just enough to stay afloat, but realize that’s all my trainer is doing too, and feeling ineffective not knowing how to get us both up and going. Elder Strong doesn’t take too kindly to suggestions, constructive criticism, companionship inventory, etc. But I’m not the stubborn bull-headed missionary who is ‘my way or the highway’ and almost the worst of all, not the fireball ala ‘Best Two Years’ style. You feel like a failure if you didn’t save your trainer’s mission, or if you didn’t catch fire together, or if you couldn’t even seem to help him become a better missionary. I’m feeling that right now, but President Cranney’s words are giving me hope.


9/3/07
Being sick is not fun. Having a sick companion is even worse! Had a bad headache last night, went straight to bed. We had a meeting w/a crazy guy who just started coming to church from an invitation we gave to him on the road on the way home from church a week or two before. Elder Strong was sick, but apparently not sick enough to let me teach, testify or even speak one word save the closing prayer. I realize he is sick, but sometimes, most of the time, it seems as though the sensitivity to the Holy Ghost is absent, and the faith that can change hearts and lives ought to come from them, right off. I can’t help but focus on the carelessness and how can we expect His trust or blessing when we don’t do what He asks in the first place: through the white bible, Preach my Gospel, and President Cranney.


Yesterday was the last Sunday in Ramenskoe and today should have been my last day of proselytizing. We returned home after the meeting and I finished Jesus the Christ and Our Search for Happiness, and I’m about to start packing for Kazakhstan! With a resolve and commitment to use the knowledge I’ve learned in this, my first transfer, to prove worthy of the call and trust God has extended to me.


9/4/07
Waiting to fly to Kazakhstan and if I don’t write before we fly, this day will pass, so I write. I’m not a greenie anymore! With the first transfer out of the way, I’ve got Kazakhstan, Elder Parker (of whom I’ve heard only good things), a mild winter (Kazakhtsan winters, so I hear, are better than Russian winters) and a talk next Sunday about this topic, ‘A day in the life of a missionary’ for 10-15 minutes. But I’ve got time at least to prepare (definitely devoting some personal study time to that).


One thing I forgot to write, but I’m not sure how I did! It happened Sunday, Vova asked us (Elder Strong and myself) to help him give his brother, Victor, a blessing. We went, but it wasn’t what I expected. I thought Vova would give the blessing, Elder Strong anoint, and I would just lay hands on with both of them. But Elder Strong anointed, and then Vova didn’t give the blessing, I did! He needed to help (I didn’t know any of the words, I intended to learn all of the blessings, sooner thanks to this experience). Vova basically coached me through the part that requires the proper wording, like a sunbeam giving a prayer with Mom or Dad whispering in the ear. So after I finished the sealing, I pronounced a blessing, of which the only sure words I remember are ‘God wants you to know that he loves you, Jesus Christ suffered for you, and he knows what you are feeling. Though it was really scary for me, it was a great experience and my first exercising the Melchizedek priesthood in Russia.


From Elder Strong
Hey Elder Taylor. First off, I want to thank you for being patient with me this last 6 weeks. Patience isn’t a very easy thing sometimes, so thank you. Next, thank you for teaching me some things. I’ve learned something from every companion. I wasn’t the world’s best trainer, but I hope you learned something from me. We had some good experiences together. Thank you for those. We watched a drunk guy dance, went to an air show, had a picnic or two, played some good games of football; now for a couple spiritual experiences that stand out: I’ll always remember when we taught Valera and he felt the spirit. Also, meetings with Dima was a cool little experience. Having him say he had read the Book of Mormon was great. For me, little experiences like that have made my mission worth it. I want you to know that I have a huge testimony of the Gospel. I’d give my life for that testimony. Joseph Smith restored the Church in this day. The Book of Mormon is the most precious tangible item in the world. I love it. I also know Gordon B. Hinckley is a prophet of God. And I know that Christ is the Savior of the world and my Redeemer. Thank you for a good companionship.


Love, Elder Zack Strong
zastrong@hotmail.com


9/5/07 - Almaty: James Parker
First day in Kazakhstan. On flight I talked a lot with the guy sitting next to me and he told me what my name would be in Russian: Zhora. I like that, maybe I’ll consider naming one of my children, or dogs that :) I got really nervous today and couldn’t really talk to anyone understandably, because I was stumbling over words and so on. But Elder Parker is a great example for me. I will learn, and he’s going to be helping me and correcting me more than Elder Strong.


Kazakhstan really is a special place, and while some of them are not prepared yet (like the atheist translator with whom we spoke tonight), but the miracles are here and more are to come.


Miracle of the day: Amount of quality work done in 2.5 to 3 hours; already yielding more than a week’s worth in my last area.


9/6/07
First day of full work here in the land of Kazakhstan, and although I’m learning things might not be as angelic as people make them out to be, there is a definite difference, and I’m especially appreciative of Elder Parker’s desire to and dedication for work. And his understanding that it isn’t enough to pray and hope and expect, we must do all in our power and help the members to do all in their power to help the Lord’s work go forward. I just think, many are called, but few are chosen. What does that mean and how should that change how I consider my calling and area and responsibility?


Had one sit down today with Yerlan. He’s heard the first two lessons and is reading in the Book of Mormon, but still says he’s not sure if God exists. I think the thing holding him back is that if he finds out it is true, then he would have to change (stop smoking, drinking, and gambling). He’s open, but it seems as if not ready, so we’re meeting every other week to see if he is reading and praying and we hope that he will be converted by the power of the Book of Mormon.


9/7/07
Taught Seyeel 2nd lesson tonight and he was very receptive. First weekly planning today, went well, but maybe a little too fast. Who knows, we will see with time and experience in the area. Filled up water jugs for Sister Nina, and I didn’t follow a simple English club prompting to give a flier to a person we saw at the pump and realizing ‘how can I expect success to be given if I can’t even be trusted to follow a prompting like that? Never again will I hesitate or ignore!


9/8/07
First, an experience from earlier. On the way to the airport in Moscow, in the bus I got hit by this horrible head rush. I broke into a sweat and got light headed and my stomach was pressurized. I took off my coat and it helped, but then my vision started blurring and everyone’s voices sounded so distant. It was one of the worst feelings I’ve had in my life. All I could do was hold on to the bar on the door of the bus with all my might, and pray for Heavenly Father’s help and healing blessing. I wonder if the gift to heal works to heal yourself through faith, if it is ultimately to help others… since I know the gifts of the spirit are only to use to bless the lives of others. Even if it means ‘healing’ yourself in order to help others. I feel that’s what happened, I regained my vision and found a bathroom quickly to help out.


Sports day today, also my first blitz here. Was good, but we will do better next time. We met with Vitaly, Dima’s dad. Not quite ready for another baptismal date, but kind of proposed during our meeting, so we hope he and his wife will be officially married soon, so they can be baptized too.


9/9/07
First Sunday in Kazakhstan, was normal. Home teaching, whole branch presidency (Elder Parker said one of the worst Sundays of his mission). We’re going through the area book tomorrow to look for any chances/former investigators. To try and get our area going again. We’ll see what happens!


9/10/07
Late, normal day. Good contact on the bus ride home. Baptism soon!


9/11/07
Many people came to English club today, for our 3 classes, attendance was: 17, 18, and 33 respectively. We had 2 lessons, both the first lesson, with Igor and Maksim. So two new investigators.


9/12/07
Meeting with Seyeel. Max is here.


9/13/07
Writing for last night. We haven’t been back to our apartment by 9pm this entire week, so time has not been plentiful for journal writing. So I’ll have to sacrifice morning work out time for journal.


Yesterday a lady went crazy on me in the bus, and wouldn’t even let me apologize. She read my tag and I asked if she had heard of our church, and she just went off.


Right now, my journal is part of my language study, so I’m writing in Russian. Yesterday we talked w/Seyeel. We wanted to teach the first lesson, but there were a lot of questions about deep principles about the Plan of Salvation. He’s sincere, but the problem is he doesn’t read from the Book of Mormon and doesn’t pray at all. In my opinion, it’s hard to understand the scriptures without prayer. I testified about prayer, but Maks started to talk before I could give a commitment. With time, I hope he’ll accept the restored Gospel.


Even now, I’m overwhelmed by the place I serve and the promises and expectations concerning the work here. I’m only one person, but I strive to remember that God called me to serve here, at this time, for his reasons. I don’t know those reasons, but I know that he knows all. I need to trust in him and he’ll trust in me.


We had a really good English club tonight, played psychiatrist and they loved that. Had a first lesson with Maoolen. He seemed more interested in just knowing about different religions, but the power of the Book of Mormon can influence people. We’ll see what happens there. Our meeting with Seyeel last night was a lot of hard, deep questions about the Plan of Salvation (devil and opposition, tree of life after tree of knowledge of good and evil, wording in the Bible). We kept coming back to the difficulty to understand the scriptures without prayer. The things of God need spiritual understanding, not only our minds and logic.


9/14/07
Really good planning session today, especially concerning the members of the church. We’re planning to visit members at least once a month and share with them how to talk to friends, family, and acquaintances about the gospel. Really excited, so is Elder Parker, about getting the church members involved. Still working on getting a branch mission coordinator, we’ll talk with President Imangazeev on Sunday.


9/15/07
Been feeling pretty overwhelmed as of late, especially concerning where I’m serving and the prophecies and feelings concerning this land. President Pieper has said that Kazakhstan, particularly Almaty, is ready for the gospel and at least 4, and maybe even 10 people are ready for baptism every month. So, expectations are pretty high and I just don’t feel like our success is anywhere near where it has been prophesied to be. But we listened to a conference talk from Oct 2006 by Anthony Perkins, which gave me some comfort. “The Great and Wonderful Love.” He gave 5 steps to feel the love of God and avoid Satan’s snares of false inadequacies, guilt, and imperfections.
1. See yourself as a precious child of a loving Father in heaven
2. Place your burdens on Jesus Christ
3. Forgive yourself of sins and imperfections
4. Sustain hope of eternal life
5. Find joy each day (serve, count your blessings)
We had a bat visit us tonight. Meeting with Seyeel, about prayer and reading. He prayed to finish the lesson, but the sincerity of his desires came out tonight, as he said, more academic and to compare religions as opposed to accepting and living the teachings of one.


Also, it was Sister Niporka’s birthday. We had cake and cookies. Also had a blitz, first time I’ve worked with Elder Burgess since the MTC.


9/16/07
First talk in Russian today. The subject was a day in the life of a missionary, but I really tried to put a focus on working with the members. We visited Sister Nina, Gosha, and Masha tonight and we’re going to every week now to help them and to practice teaching and just get the members excited to work! We’re going to visit Brother Sultan and Sister Zoya also this week to do the same.


9/17/07
Water for Sister Nina and spiritual thought about obedience. Met with Rashid today, the slower Rashid. We read from the Book of Mormon and sang the first verse of Joseph Smith’s first prayer.


Most importantly, we set some goals which are going to stretch us and help us grow. 50 lessons and 20 contacts this week. We’re cutting lunch to 1.5 hours and being out the door by 11:15am and in bed by 10:30pm in order to do so. With the help of the members and the Lord, the blessings are coming.


Miracle of the day: 3 contacts in a row on the last road back home.


9/18/07
2 meetings, both fell through, achieving our daily goals with the Lord’s help, but we need to be teaching more and finding less. The work is going in that direction. Still need to meet with more members to get them excited about the work. My card doesn’t work, apparently my account says I’ve taken 30k tenge off already this month, but I’ve only taken 10k. We’ll just have to get by.


9/19/07
Another p-day and written home, bought groceries, and eaten. More detail here. I’m in Kazakhstan! President Pieper of the first quorum of the seventy is the area president for Eastern Europe, which includes all of Russia and Kazakhstan. In fact, he and his family are the reason I’m even here now. He lived and worked here in Almaty as an attorney a few years ago and started sharing the gospel and started a branch here.  He was here and present when Elder Russell M. Nelson dedicated Kazakhsta, he was called as mission president for Samara Russia, but was called as area president and member of the Seventy 9 months into that calling. He has made some prophecies and promises concerning the land which are very grand, amazing, and overwhelming when you realize you are part of it. I’ll give some paraphrasements here:


“The eyes of the Twelve are on this country. It is the only Muslim country with missionaries and is a bridge to other countries. Missionaries came in June 2004, you cannot be casual. It will take faith to move the work forward. Faith activates. We activate faith by our actions.


If investigators are not progressing, turn them over to the members and go out and find others. The Lord has people ready in Almaty, at least 4 and maybe 10 per month. Future stake presidents and other church leaders are waiting for you to find them. People are out there to take the gospel to Pakistan and China. One baptism a month isn’t good enough. Almaty is the center of strength for the gospel to go to the east, south, and west. Catch a vision, this is a very important step for the church, don’t take it lightly. If the missionaries don’t pick it up, send them home and let the members do the work. Do what you need to do today, find those who are ready today. The Lord is ready for Almaty.”


That’s what I’m trying to be a part of right now. Yeah, pretty intimidating, but I’m trying my best to realize and keep in mind that the Lord has called me here by the means of His servants, the apostles and the mission president, President Cranney. It just feels like whatever you do or however you use your time, it wasn’t good enough because of what you could or should have been accomplishing in that same time. I’m not sure what I’m going to do, or even what I could do, to help bring the gospel to Pakistan or China… but I think Elder Parker and I have caught a  little of the vision. We’ve resolutely decided to work with the members. Visit them often, teach them lessons, and teach them how they can share the gospel with friends. We have also determined to increase our own efforts by teaching more lessons and getting more contacts on the streets while contacting. We’ve set some, you could say, lofty goals. But we’re on track this week and we know there are people ready TODAY, like President Pieper said. 50 lessons and 20 contacts this week, and we are doing it. This month we are trying to right ourselves and get the correct direction, which we have as far as working with the members and increasing our own efforts. I’m interested to know if we should be performing more service or if street contacting is best, or which method of finding will lead us to the people prepared to receive the gospel… something I think I’ll talk to President Cranney about this week when he’s here for zone conference. 


I am excited to be here in the midst of this great work. I have definitely felt the truth of President Ezra Taft Benson’s statement since I’ve come to Kazakhstan. “I have often said one of the greatest secrets of missionary work is work! If a missionary works, he will get the spirit, if he gets the spirit, he will teach by the spirit, and if he teaches by the spirit, he will touch the hearts of the people and he will be happy. There will be no homesickness, no worrying about families, for all time, talents, and interests are centered on the work of the ministry. Work, work, work - there is no satisfactory substitute, especially in missionary work”


That’s what I’m all about right now. Been in Kazakhstan for 2 weeks, and will probably be here through winter. Usually, because of visa and flight expenses, missionaries serve here for at least 6 months. And if that holds true, my current companion, Elder James Parker from Orem, whose dad is Brother Parker, the BOM and NT professor at BYU and whose brother served in Vladivostok and knows Seth because they both taught in the MTC together, will be headed back to Russia at the end of the next transfer (about mid-December). But I hope he gets to stay at least another transfer, through Christmas and his year mark. I have a feeling that together, and with the Lord’s help, we will take part in some serious miracles in the coming week.


9/20/07
Split with Elder Salsbury today and yesterday. Very different, very soft, very slow, clear and I’m grateful for Elder Parker. We went tracting, not helpful.


9/21/07
First experience tracting was Wednesday night (9/19/07). We tracted an apartment building over by the church and I realized how awkward it is for you to come to someone’s home, uninvited, to share a message about God and religion (awkward for them). A few people openly talked with us, and of those only one lady wanted to know more. We invited her to church, but she wouldn’t give us her phone #... but we’ll see what comes of it. I think we can find other, better finding tools and methods which would be more effective (maybe service, firesides & other church activities members could invite friends to)


Really cool scripture from our monthly mission newsletter, DC 35:13. “Wherefore, I call upon the weak things of the world, those who are unlearned and despised, to thrash the nations by the power of my spirit.” Right now, ⅔ of our mission force has been in the field for 4 months or less! We really need to rely on Him, and that’s the only way we can accomplish what He has prepared for us.


We met with Maksim last night and read 3 Nephi 11 together. He had questions about baptism and repentance, specifically his own! He is one of the prepared and his friend Azamat might be too. Have yet to meet with Azamat, but we will!


Elder Parker is a little sick today, and it had some effect on his attitude and focus. Hard to be patient, loving, and not snappy with a 100 degree fever, headache and the chills. But he started feeling better, although we didn’t finish weekly planning. I made him spaghetti and he took a nap.


Also worked with Elder Burgess again tonight. Contacting is a lot different from how we taught together in the MTC!


9/22/07
Can’t remember my mission prep teacher’s name and it’s a real bother! (Livingstone) Good blitz today, meeting with Vitali fell through, but we had a good talk with Maksim and Seyeel about commandments, and a little about repentance with Maksim. He’s great, his desire and interest are sincere and he is understanding. He’s not ready for baptism, he says because he smokes and drinks and doesn’t love everybody, and after baptism he can’t do those things. He understands and wants to change, but knows it will take repentance and time. 


Seyeel on the other hand, not quite as understanding. We taught an analogy about commandments, where a fish in a bowl says the boundaries of the bowl are limiting, restricting him. The fish jumps out of the bowl to freedom… and finds the boundaries were actually protecting him. Seyeel added his example, what about a bigger bowl!


9/23/07
Got a letter from Kallene, first non-family letter in the field! Zone conference tomorrow, excited to talk w/PResident and hear from him about the work. I have a lot of questions about how we might improve. President Cranney spoke in church and gave us a tool, every member should carry an invitation with them at all times. We’re going to remember and try and use that as a springboard into more member missionary work.


Maksim came to church. He was late (half way through the sacrament), but stayed for the whole 3 hours. We’re going to buy him ear plugs this week so he can sleep Saturday nights, as he lives next to a dance club. He said he’d come every week if he had ear plugs to get enough sleep the night before.


Had a really really good candy today, pistachio filled chocolates, very delicious.


9/24/07
Zone conference with President Cranney today, really really good. Ballet, maybe better uses of our time exist. More on the morrow


9/25/07
Interview with President Cranney today and got some more inspiration. Truly, I can tell my testimony is growing and was really strengthened that he has been called of God and receives revelation for this work, for this people, and for us missionaries. My study is going to be dedicated for a while to expounding on this zone conference and how to apply it.


Today was an okay day, but we had a meeting fall through and somehow everyone left before the spiritual thought. We tried to do a daily planning session like counseled, but we’re not on the same page. Got some comp issues to work out now… oh goody! He’s not in a good mood right now, I’ll find out though and work at it.


9/26/07
P-day, got my money back finally. Went up to the mountain, Medeo, for the first time. I’m sure we’ll return. Got some pretty solid contacts and started our monthly calendar. I feel like the tools available (daily planner) I need to make better use of.


9/27/07
Good first meeting with Marlen today, although we found out his parents are against, but he definitely felt the spirit. We’re still working on cutting our lesson times to 30 minutes, at President’s advice.


Also, this week we have already or will find, two people who will be baptized. It’s just a matter of the spirit showing, helping, and converting according to our ability to be worthy of and bring that spirit into meetings, conversations, etc.


9/28/07
Weekly planning today. Always feels like we have a good direction, but we’re not moving along it too quickly! We’re struggling to get the # of sit down meetings and new investigators we should. Might need to think of some drastic ways to get more meetings or something. Maybe cottage meetings, like Dad suggested in his last e-mail. I like writing, but hate that it ends up being only 5 minutes at the end of the day. A shame, but what can you do? Baptism tomorrow, Brother Sultan’s daughter is being baptized. Should be a great opportunity for investigators to experience a baptism, especially Maksim.


9/29/07
Reading back on some of my MTC entries, I’m longing for that same spirit to be here. Examining myself, and I think I need to do a few more things or think or ponder on, or just do something to bring the spirit into my life and work. It was there in the MTC, how did I lose some of it? TIME TO INVITE HIM BACK


The baptism was today, Brother Sultan baptized his daughter. Alibek, Vitali and his wife, MAksim, and Yerlan came. We didn’t get to meet with Maksim like we wanted to afterward, but he stuck around until we finished draining and drying the font (9:30pm) and he’s coming to church tomorrow too! Treats were good too, my personal dictionary was sacrificed in the draining process (fell into the water). Tomorrow have a split with Elder Burgess. We’re teaching two lessons, a guy from India and Anton (contact from today) after church. Should be good!


9/30/07
All four of our meetings today didn’t work out… but church went well! Elder Burgess and I tracted together up above the church and made a few really good contacts, left a Book of Mormon or two. We taught a girl from the window, she couldn’t open the door for some reason, ala Romeo and Juliet, Elder Burgess thought, and also had a really good pepper filled w/rice and ground beef dinner unexpectedly from a neighbor, as we tracted in our own building!


10/1/07
Happy October. Some opportunities I had to exercise the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood. Our first Sunday here in Kazakshtan, Elder Burgess was voice for a blessing for Sister Galina concerning her eye operation. Elder Saulisbury anointed and Elder Parker and I joined in. On another occasion, Elder Parker, Salisbury, and I gave Sister Zoya a blessing. I anointed and Elder Parker sealed the anointing. Also, yesterday we tracted into a lady who is apparently a secret Christian, unbeknownst to her husband and parents!


Interesting day, finished the split and had district meeting. Got our whiteboard today and set up some good meetings for tomorrow and Wednesday. We cleaned for the patriarch, Gary Browning, who is coming Saturday at 4 am. Elder Parker and I are going with Sveta to pick him up. The branch is really using us missionaries as a crutch… it’s hard, we have to figure out how to best help the members take responsibility and plan and help the church grow and progress.


10/2/07
3 lessons planned for today, all fell through. It’s hard to understand what we can do or change or should do in order to have more meetings actually work out!


Elder Parker found a nice jacket here, just in time too. It started pouring today and I kept dry thanks to the jacket. A lot more to be written tomorrow. P-day w/time to catch up on thoughts, feelings, experiences, etc.


10/3/07
P-day on the inside! It’s nice to take a day to relax in the apartment after shopping, write a letter (to Kallene) and enjoy a day of rest. Here’s a record of who we are teaching at the moment.
\
Maksim - about 21, he found an English club invitation on the ground and came. He came to sports day a few times and was interested in what we do as missionaries. In our first meeting he said if he found out that everything was true (the Book of Mormon, church, Joseph Smith), then he would be baptized. He’s been to church twice, late both times because he woke up late, missing sleep because of the music from the nightclub next door. We bought him earplugs this week! He came to the baptism of Brother Sultan’s daughter. He’s on the path toward baptism, we just need to set a date and work towards it. He told us he’s a bad kid, because he drinks and smokes. He understands that baptism means changing his life, we just need to help him prepare for it!


Yerlan - Not ready, seen baptism and come to church, but doesn’t seem like he even wants to feel the Spirit, or admit to anyone that he does. More curious about what our prophet and church says we can and can’t do.


Seyeel - Just researching religion, no intention of joining even if he found a true one. Not looking or prayer to find answers, just informational.


Marlen - First lesson he felt the spirit and went well, despite ending just 1 minute before English club started. Already we know his parents are against it, haven’t been able to get a hold of him since the day after our first lesson.


Aleksey - speaks English well, believes in God, that’s all. Glad to talk to us ‘for hours about God or politics, especially in English.’ Called and wanted to meet a few days ago. Once called and he said he couldn’t talk because he was playing with his son. That’s the kind of father we need in our branch! Came to English club last night, Elders Burgess and Saulisbury taught him a brief first lesson. He said he would be ready to take a Book of Mormon next meeting and bring his friend too, and that they’d be at church on Sunday!


10/4/07
Three meetings today, which fell through. It’s a problem our whole district has had of late. This week we’ve had 7 meetings planned and scheduled, and 0 have happened! We’re not sure what to do, what it means, or how we can change it. The object of much prayer and fasting. 


Also, Elder Parker we think has giardia, probably from a while ago…


10/5/07
A month I’ve been here already in Kazhy. This morning we got up at a quarter to four so we could be ready to pick up Patriarch Gary Browning at the airport. He was the first mission president in Russia, wrote the book “Russia and the Restored Gospel”, and apparently currently the only patriarch giving blessings in Russia (and now Kazakhstan). This is the first time a patriarch has stepped foot in Kazakhstan in this dispensation, and we got to escort him this morning. We’ll be guarding the church for the next week or so to ensure the reverence of the building and give Patriarch Browning the VIP treatment. 3 meetings tonight, will report on that later. 


One of the meetings worked, Ivan, and it kind of ripped something out of me. He wouldn’t even take a Book of Mormon.


10/6/07
First patriarchal blessing pronounced in Kazakhstan today, it was tribe Nephtali.


We ‘stood guard’ for some more patriarchal blessings. I think it really does help to bring the spirit when we whisper in the building. Elder Parker ate half a giant swiss roll (Rulyet) for lunch, I helped him finish it off. We’re fasting now… more on that tomorrow. Today first time ever let in [while knocking doors] and allowed to teach a full first lesson. Her name was Tatiyana and she offered us fruit (I don’t consider it breaking our fast, I hope the Lord doesn’t). It was awesome!


10/7/07
Remembered in the last few days how much I love the hymns! I think I’m going to make an effort to learn and sign more of them - already doing as part of language study. Especially before my personal prayers, so I can invite the spirit more and more readily accept his presence when I am praying, instead of just thinking, or falling asleep, or drifting in and out of consciousness. 


Our fast today, among other things, has a particular focus on our meetings this week. We are asking of the Lord that if the people we have contacted and set up meetings with, if their meetings work out, it means they’re ready to hear and be taught. But if the meeting does not work out, it means they are not ready and we are to move on.


Vladimir came to church! How crazy, and Vitaly is getting married finally this Saturday!


10/8/07
Had a fireside tonight with Patriarch Gary Browning. He shared with us some very powerful experiences and insights, including a vision he had as he was dreaming concerning his blessing and whether the tribe was correct. He saw mountains and hills, and flowers and grass, and water, all so clearly and brightly. And that he heard a voice which said “climb your little mountains, go walk forward with faith, I will be with you.” Very powerful.


He also shared an analogy about how our life is like a circle with thousands upon thousands of envelopes inside, each containing certain blessings we can qualify for, are entitled to, or have outlined in our righteous contemplations. And a patriarchal blessing opens a handful of them, but so many more exist too!


10/9/07
1.5 hour meeting with Maksim. Not ready for baptism yet, but committed to repentance. Tatiyana is doubting!


10/10/07
P-day of frustration. Studied and did guard duty for the last time for Patriarch Browning. We got his leftover peanut butter :) Tried to email home only to get shafted halfway through (message cleared). Tried to get a haircut, only to find out it costs 2500 tenge at Ramstore! Scratch that. Spent a lot on groceries (but we do have a potato masher now), ate good spaghetti (green pepper + onion = great!) and managed to qualify for some success, which the Lord gave us tonight. Max and Dima got their patriarchal blessings today, it was literally awesome seeing them come out afterwards. Dima’s face was lit up and he just couldn’t stop smiling, but with a calm brightness. Max was all spiritual energy, wanting to shout it from the rooftops! Have to wonder what is in store for them, true pioneers of the church in these days. Likely to bring the gospel to China, Pakistan, and beyond.


10/11/17
Senior missionaries, Sister and Brother Vincent arrived.


10/12/17
Yesterday we began our goal of inviting 20 people daily, as a companionship, to learn about the gospel. It already is having a positive effect on our work. It is difficult and we haven’t accomplished it yet, but I can understand the promise that when it happens, baptisms will double. It feels good to testify of the restoration to a Russian Orthodox guy on the bus, and to let him know that I know it’s true, and he can too!


On the way to Brother Sultan’s we rode two buses, on the first a guy shot me down, wouldn’t let me say anything. I asked why, and he said ‘because, that’s your understanding’. I didn’t say more, but asked Elder Parker as we walked to the other bus stop what to do in that situation. Testify? Let him be? Talk to someone else? He said to testify so the warning voice and invitation are there. This I did with Aleksey, the man on the next bus who I spoke with, who had alcohol on his breath and a plant in his bag. “I rarely visit church”


10/13/17
Found out transfers today. Elder Saulisbury is going back to Russia (only after 3 transfers in Kazakhstan). Elder Parker is the new district leader and Elder Watkins is coming here! Crazy stuff.


Maksim committed to live the word of wisdom as of today. We made him a ‘not allowed’ list as a reminder. Fasting tomorrow in part and Monday in part for him and his baptism. We hope soon, Nov 10 is too soon, but by Christmas definitely.


10/14/07
Church today, some american doctors are here helping the Balls (senior missionaries, humanitarian, usually in Astana) to train doctors here on how to do neonatal resuscitation. Elder Saulisbury bore his testimony  in church and we started our fast for Maksim, to be baptized the 24th of November. We feel that is the right day, and we prayed, are praying, and will pray for him.


Also had a weird experience tonight. Talked to a lady on the top floor of one of the buildings, and she was all out of it. Waving her hands and saying how she loves us and her family and everyone, calling us angels and stuff. “For me! For me! I love you! I love you!” We went down the stairs to the next level, she was saying “you’re angels, you’re angels!” and “I love you!”, but then she said ‘and for me…?” Something stopped me before we knocked on the next door. I was in front and Elder Parker nearly ran me over. Before he could say anything I held up my hand and whispered, ‘wait’ in Russian (шас). The lights were off on this floor, and we silently looked over to the opposite wall, where we could see her shadow, now crouching at the top of the steps, breathing hard, maybe crying. The feeling chilled me to the core, something wasn’t right. We tried the elevator, heard it start and then abruptly stop. We bounded down the stairs and got out of that building, and when we got some distance away, prayed to have the spirit return and found a man named Salamat!


10/15/07
Good day, first meeting with Aleksey. Want to write more, but good missionaries w/great stories often don’t have the time to write them in their journals.


10/16/07
Elder Parker sang to Kuat, a guy we met on the street who called, because he thought it was Elder Saulisbury on his last night.


10/17/07
Beginning to loathe p-days, because I feel like we waste so much time and we never get around to using the day as it is meant, for PREPARATION. It seems a concept lost on many of the missionaries in our mission. To them, p-day is funday. I’d rather clean, fix my pants, write a handwritten letter, and chill here, then go sit around at Medeo.


Meeting w/Maksim and Sister Inna. He didn’t keep any of the past commitments -> word of wisdom [tea], repentance, reading 2 Nephi 2. Not so sure about his progress, just not that great of a day overall. But I did get a haircut for free!


10/18/07
Saw Elder Watkins today. We got locked in the library before English club and I got my hands on some Kazakh - English books. The Kazakh language study starts tomorrow!


10/19/07
Planning session today. Along with a meeting with Rasheed, the husband of Gulzhan, and a meeting with Bakhtyor. Bakhtyor called tonight oo, to make sure we got home okay and to tell Elder Parker to bring his contacts to church on Sunday so he can try them out, lol. He has a good heart, but he is different, bless his heart. He still wants to go to America and preach the Bible in all 50 states. Makes delicious plov though.


I decided today that I need a kick in the pants, because I’m not following the promptings I’m getting courageously, like I should. Even on the mini-bus to Bakhtyor’s, Elder Parker had to yell ‘get him!’ in order for me to finally open my mouth. It’s stupid that I’m fearing man more than God. So I’ve told Elder Parker to do things like that, and I think I’m going to give myself a rule, I have 10 seconds once I’m on a bus to start a conversation, the punishment if I don’t, TBD.


10/20/07
Split with Elder Watkins today. Always so different contacting with someone new and not your companion. Had three lessons planned, two worked out, including a really good lesson with Yegor and his friend Sasha, with Sister Zoya there. Got lost on Al-Farabi trying to find Yedeel and meet his family (less active, baptized in Germany, a little bit out of it according to Elders Saulisbury and Burgess).


Elder Watkins told us about Vladimir in Zhukovsky, a member who is a former ping pong pro. He had to kill one of his ducks to feed his family, but couldn’t bring himself to do it. He prayed and opened the Book of Mormon to know what to do, and ready about Nephi taking Laban by the hair of his head and cutting his head off… so he did it with the duck! I guess the Book of Mormon really does have all the answers to our questions.


10/21/07
Two Turkish guys came to sacrament today and the lady the Elders talked to about UFOs. Had a good contacting session tonight, following after the Russian guy with the dog [never found him, but maybe we found who we were supposed to!] We had just taught Bulent and his wife and checked the home of Vladimir (old, sick, and comes to the first hour of church). We walked past man with a big dog, we stopped to call the two people who flashed us and he passed us. After he had gone a while, we decided to follow him, but Rasheed called trying to get us to go to Grace church (Благодат). We stopped, the man continued… we decided to go out past Al-Farabi, but then decided to follow him… (cont on 10/23/07) 


10/22/07
Pretty much the bestest day ever. First lesson with Rasheed from Blagodat church, was 3 hours long [watched the Restoration video and Testaments]. More tomorrow.


10/23/07
(cont from 10/21/07)
We turned around and started walking towards the church, didn’t see him at the first intersection, but thought he turned left so we went to the left. Elder Parker stopped this old guy, and we talked for at least 5 min, but he told us that God is in each of us… and that the forgiveness I’ve experienced for my sins is simply a figment of my imagination, just my mind telling my heart. He kept trying to lecture us more, but we eventually broke free of him. Continued down the street.


Next man we talked to is from Turkey, doesn’t speak Russian, but speaks decent English. Told him about the news that there is a prophet alive on the earth! But he said that he is leaving in 2 months, so he said “so what are we going to do?” Gave him a restoration pamphlet (I had one in English in my pocket) and got his #. We continued down the road and decided to turn right, go to Dosteek and back up Al-Farabi and home.


We met Timur there, under the “Based on experience” sign, asked if he believed in God. He did, but not much more. Told him about how God has shown His love for us in our day by calling a prophet. We met yesterday night w/him, taught him about the Book of Mormon and Joseph Smith, and how we can know of its truth. He prayed for the first time at the end… wow! He thanked God for showing and opening the right path to him, for the wonderful people he sent to him (us), and for this new life. Yeah, next meeting is Wednesday night.


Next, we met a man from India, here for a month but we invited him to church and he said he might, and we saw him again last night too!


We had turned around by then to return home a little early to get some phone calls in, but we met a 71 year old man, Aleksander, who found faith 2 years ago (Russian Orthodox) and is only a child when it come to faith. Carries his Bible with him all the time now. We shared how the BOM can actually strengthen our faith in Christ more than the Bible. Almost got away. Saying he’d want to grow in his Orthodox faith before meeting with us, but testified of the BOM and he gladly gave his #.


Next, we talked with a young kid (maybe 15 or 16) and told him that we have a prophet on the earth today. “I didn’t know there’s a prophet alive today!” Threw his cigarette to the ground and we got his #.


And who knows, well, God knows, what would have happened if we had gone in a different direction and not followed the dog walker.


Yesterday was awesome, lesson with Rasheed, he really is looking for more truth and as he said, it’s “urgent” to know more if there really is a modern prophet. He’s very Christian, loves the Bible, and he needs an answer before Nov 15, as he might serve a mission for his church in west Kazakhstan at that time...we’re praying for him. We also met w/Timur, and he is just ready to accept God into his life.


Before that though, we met Mikhail. First off, Timur couldn’t find our building, so he called and we said we’d wait for him out on Al-Farabi. We were waiting and we saw him on the other side of the street. He crossed and we walked up to each other, shook hands and he said “talk to me.” We said, “let’s go, our building is right over here.” We walked and he asked us where we were from, we found out he’s a welder (has been for 10 years) and he asked what we’re doing in Almaty. That was a little weird, we thought maybe he didn’t understand our street lesson. We went into our building, he looked through the Liahonas on the table, asked if we were Baptist or Jehovah’s Witness, he took off his beanie and Elder Parker asked him, “Are you Timur?” And he responds, “No, my name is Mikhail.” He totally just came in with us! And we mistook him for Timur! Crazy, but we got his contact info and he lives nearby, so we’ll see what comes of it!


10/23/07
Great day, Elder Parker was a lil’ off, he’s just got a lot on his mind and he’s thinking too much. Do yours, let the Lord do His, and don’t worry about the rest!


10/24/07
Decent p-day, we have free internet from now on, thanks to the Vincents. I found out my next niece’s name, Hallie Jo Taylor, said Brandon in his letter today.


We went ice skating up at Medeyoo. Found out that Timur is gone for 20 days before we can meet again.


Just thinking today, some deep questions even prompted by people we meet contacting. Like why Jesus Christ? Was he chosen, or did he volunteer using his own agency? Or was it a consequences of his position as firstborn, his obligation? Too deep for me! Need to focus pondering on faith, obedience -> the first laws and principles of the gospel.


10/25/07
Yesterday, forgot to write it… we were talking to a man up at Medeyoo when we were putting on our skates. He came over and asked if he could get a picture with a holy man (me) and took one of me and him on his phone! That was pretty cool, also saw Hubba Bubba in Ramstore and had to buy it. Kind of a blah day. We’ve starting meeting with Vitaly again.


10/26/07
Sad and happy news today. First lesson with very sincere young man (Vasya) who the Vincents found. He said he’ll come to church on Sunday.


But just before we left our apartment for that meeting, we got a text from Rasheed which said “My God does not allow me to meet with you.” He wouldn’t answer our calls, texted him to find out why, and he sent Psalms 119:140. Apparently the word of God is only pure from scriptures, w/o us or anyone teaching. I sent him Matthew 7:7-8 and Proverbs 3:5-6 in reply, but no response.


We feel terrible, because he so badly wants to do the right thing before God. Only I fear that the Bible is more of his God than the living God. I hope that he is praying to know the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon.


10/27/07
Good blitz today with Elder Burgess. Went out to Aksai 3B finally and actually found Constantine! Taught him an abridged first lesson and gave him a BOM. I think his friendship with Dale Johnson is going to help him more than he ever imagined.


10/28/07
Working day Sunday, basically nobody at church. Good meeting with Sasha and Yegor. Almost a baptismal date for each!


10/29/07
Yesterday was the first time I’ve felt, or at least recognized, the influence of the Holy Ghost guiding my prayer. It was before we went out contacting on a Sunday night. We were heading to Sveta’s house to drop off some announcements and contact back. During the prayer, I asked for help to find someone who is ready, but I felt the distinct prompting that more than one person was ready and out there. So I changed my prayer to find all ready and acknowledge to Heavenly Father that we knew there were many prepared. We got two contacts before the sisters called and we found out that Yegor and Sasha were waiting at the church for us! Taught them faith, repentance, and a little about baptism. Had about 45 minutes until 9pm, so we contacted home and got two more contacts! Two of those 4 I feel have very good potential… prayer by the spirit!


10/30/07
Kind of a blah day… tried caviar for the first time (orange and sick), finally got to sit down with Vladimir in his apartment today with his wife, Nina. He’s a retired geologist and awesome all around! Met with Yegor, he’s going to have some trouble living the law of chastity, but we’re praying and pulling for him. Halloween and p-day tomorrow.


10/31/07
Happy Halloween! P-day party we had tonight with the branch.


I bought a sweet coat for winter, with a fur liner and everything. Dropped 10k tenge for it, which is $80-95, but will be worth it!


11/1/07
“Gone till November” like Wycleff Jean said. Met with Serik and Sarah w Elder Burgess today. Great meeting, they understand the importance of the apostasy and necessity for a Restoration. Going to pray about Joseph Smith they will.


11/2/07
Good meeting with Maksim and Yegor today. Both are living their commitments (Word of Wisdom and law of chastity, respectfully) and ready. We had a lady go Karl Marx on us today (opium of the masses), but had a good just in the door lesson with a lady in a Cuba shirt.


11/3/07
“We’ll sing and we’ll shout: a manic celebration of the Holy Spirit”
One conference Nov 2007. Found out at lunch that Elder Parker is staying in Kazakhstan for at least one more transfer! Means we’ll get Halloween, Thanksgiving, Christmas, & Kwanza together, Hannukah too.


11/4/07
So this zone conference was a little different. Elder Bednar is going to be coming to Moscow this month, so we got our own topic, special one. It was at the top, hosanna moments, he called them. So my talk, I rewrote my own verses to “how Firm a Foundation”, including references to the “changed-my-life” scripture list I have. The lyrics are as follows:


How Firm a Foundation - remix
The happiness born of obedience to the Lord
Beginning in this life, enduring evermore
His goal is to bless us as we will allow
The Spirit will guide us, the Spirit will guide us
The Spirit will guide, calm, and help us know how


In ev’ry condition, in sickness, in health
In whom I have trusted I know for myself
Stay true to His word and intent to obey
Desire to live righteous, desire to live righteous,
Desire to live righteous-ly all through my days


As we forget our needs the Lord will attend.
Lose yourself for Him and be found in the end.
He gives to you weakness so you may be strong
Relying, rejoicing, relying, rejoicing
Relying, rejoicing, and praising in song.


References:
Mosiah 2:41
DC 59:23
Moses 1:39
2 Nephi 32:3
Hymn 85
2 Nephi 4:19
Hymn 254
Mosiah 5:2
Matthew 16:25
Ether 12:27


Nice meeting with celestial Rasheed again today. Found out Vladimir fell and broke his arm! A full month until he’ll be out of bed :( 


Thought, pondered, and prayed about baptismal dates for Yegor and Maksim today. This is about the 3rd or 4th time I think I’ve literally prayed seeking an answer in that very moment. It takes a lot of focus and work to pray with all energy of the soul, but it’s worth it. Dec 15th is what we feel the Lord has in mind for both of them.


11/6/07
Asked Yegor about December 15th today, after teaching about the gift of the Holy Ghost and repentance. He’s going to pray and give us his answer on Thursday when we meet again (in 2 days).


Maksim was on that meeting, and he took over. We need to explain to him, and even with most of the members we have in our lessons (Sister Inna, Sister Zoya, etc.) to reel it in.


You really do learn so much everyday… but even the smallest part of it can’t be written. I’m starting to understand that which the Book of Mormon prophets said in the same vein, about the words of their prophecies and the doings of their peoples. I don’t event want to try to begin to write those things… but as the small miracles come, I will write as I can.


11/7/07
Not too fond of p-days spent more in stressing and traveling than actually preparing… and getting home past 9, 9:15, 9:30! (even without a meeting that late)


11/8/07
Baptismal date with Yegor today! December 15th we are working towards… and tought him the word of wisdom today. I’m bringing him some orange lemon tea on Saturday to replace his green and black. Next we just need to get his family involved and interested!


11/9/07
And with the arrival of the official 6 month mark, I take a few minutes at 6:30am to review some of the miracles, events and happenings of the last half a year.


In the last few days I’ve been pondering and brainstorming concerning that deep and meaningful instruction from the Doctrine and Covenants “Many are called, but fe ware chosen”, and about what it means to be called, and what it means to be chosen.


From an early age, I seem to have become aware of myself, sensing the possibility and probability that I indeed, am one of the chosen. And hence, our strengths become our downfalls, youth and greatness is the dangerous recipe which yields pride, and only with true understanding, true knowledge and wisdom can the ego be thwarted and the potential greatness, the full measure of greatness be achieved.


Now, that understanding is more openly pouring into my soul and mind. I will not, nor can I begin to imagine or know what things the Lord has in store, but I can feel, sense the majesty of it all, and I’m starting to grasp what I must do in order to remain worthy of His choice. But also, I’m beginning to understand the reasons for which He has chose me, and what talents and abilities I have to fulfill His purposes and also the responsibilities that come with so much given and entrusted to me from the Lord… among his very chosen…


Good meeting with Maksim today, not quite set the date for the 15th of December, but we’re going to work towards it! Find some cool features on my camera today too.


11/10/07
First snow of my mission fell yesterday, all day. The weather went from pleasant to freezing in 2 days, so we’ll be doing more tracting from now until spring. Finally get to see general conference tomorrow! Yegor, Maksim, Quaneesh, Aleksei and Madina should be there.


11/11/07
Turns out, forgot we only have one DVD player, so we couldn’t watch conference in English while the branch did in Russian. Yegor and Yerlan were the only ones who ended up coming, a little harder to pay attention when it’s in Russian!


Rasheed, who has a crush on Sister Shkoropyatova, called again tonight. Amen! Amen!


11/12/07
District meeting today on BoM. Definitely going to pray for and study how to use the Book of Mormon more often in teaching and more effectively when used. Also very interested in the role of music. I think there is definitely potential for hymns or music to be used more in teaching, finding, etc. Interesting  and I’ll have to give that some prayer and consideration. Also just comparing my leadership style vs Elder Parkers would be very interesting, thinking about how I would do things. Personally (not better or for worse, just because). Azamat and Maksim met the Vincents tonight.


11/13/07
Timur is supposed to return tonight/today. Woke with a sore throat and I’m afraid today may be a trial with that.


Yesterday we met with Hussein and although he didn’t quite grasp the whole concept of the restoration, he felt the Spirit as we taught and the Spirit testified to him of its truthfulness. Sometimes with meetings like that, we worry that maybe they just don’t understand, and that it is just taking up our time. But I know that when people we meet with feel the Spirit, it just might be the closest to God or Christ they’ve ever been. And that’s our purpose. To invite others to come unto Christ. Even if they don’t quite understand the doctrine, when they feel the Spirit, the Spirit will help them know that whatever it is, it is right!


11/14/07
Last door, 6th floor, slippers, market, hat, gloves


11/15/07
Yegor is awesome and Greesha’s going to get baptized end of January and we’re going to Moscow on Monday… yeah, crazy!


We ran out of copies of the Book of Mormon, so started taking from the branch library for investigators.


We met with MAksim and an imam from the Abay region (kind of like a stake president equivalent). Two crazies contacting, a drunk who wants to get baptized and a Muslim man whose family killed his brother for leaving the Islamic faith :(


11/17/07
Brother Yedeel, Renat, Maksim, and split with Elder Watkins.


11/18/07
Sunday comes and Sunday goes… but as far as the church members… that’s another story. See, there is an inherent casualness concerning all aspects of life in Kazakhstan… save work. Especially religiously speaking, few are aware of and even less adhere to the responsibilities that come with baptism, church membership, and other covenants (including the oath and covenant of the priesthood). Too many believe the words of the prophets and apostles, but manage to exclude themselves from any counsel or command not generally accepted in the culture. Members not coming to church on Sunday because of ‘personal things’, no more than a month after receiving a patriarchal blessing. More and more, I am discovering how less and less I know how to work with people… especially w/the language and cultural barriers. But that’s what a mission’s all about, learning to get along with others (like President Monson said in the MTC).


There are some days when you feel pretty down in the dumps… and today could be considered as such. Neither Yegor or Maksim came to church, and neither answered their phones, plus, only 30 people came to church at all today, and at least half left after sacrament meeting. We were watching General Conference and decided to watch for an hour more than normal… and by the end, missionaries outnumbered members and then 3 investigators. Yeah… feeling a little down, but had a nice chicken pasta w/white sauce and some solid contacting to brighten up the day. We’ll be up at 2am tomorrow and off to Moscow for the day. Be sure to get some good pics for memories.


Thinking a little bit lately about any advice I have so far as a missionary… especially the whole ‘If you had one piece of advice, what would it be?’ and I think I’ve got it for the time being… never be content. 3 Nephi 11 -> change ‘contention is not of me, but of the devil’ to ‘contentment is not of me’


11/20/07
Yesterday was crazy… we were up at 2am, flew to Moscow and came back on a 10pm flight. Got back to our apartment about 6:30am. (time difference and all). So tired.


11/21/07
Properly reprimanded, I’m vowing to record more of my experiences from everyday. Dad wrote today to make sure that I’m recording them for my own benefit later and for the blessing of others.


In the last few days we’ve really been able to get to know each other better as a district, largely thanks to that Moscow adventure.


Today we met with Peter. He called us out of nowhere about a month ago, looking for directions to the ‘Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints!’ He speaks English, teaches elementary math and English at an international school (Miras) here in Almaty. We’ve tried multiple times to meet with him before, but Satan (and traffic) we were working against us. Finally got to meet and he’s awesome! Catholic, but very open and accepting. Prayed to end, and we’re picking him up for church on Sunday. He found some small article in a publication called “Steppin out Kazakhstan” which had a blurb about our church and had Sveta’s phone number. He called her and she gave him our number and here we are. He’s awesome! Yegor is doing great as well.


11/22/07
Oh yeah, it’s a good thing Peter’s badminton club starts at 4pm on Sunday, so he’ll be able to come to church.


Great day today, all 3 meetings went through, although I do hate English club, but that’s a story for another day.


Today we first met with Nakan and Timur. Nakan is Turkish, taught him a first lesson in English and gave him a Turkish Book of Mormon. He’s Muslim, but happy and willing to learn more and pray about the Book of Mormon and Joseph Smith.


Timur, on the other hand, is ready. He said he’s 26 and he’s tired. He’s looked for answers. Read the Bible, Quran, and hasn’t found them. Wild lesson like President Cranney said it should be (Plan of Salvation, 2 Nephi 2, last half of 1st lesson) and he prayed to end it! I love it when they pray to end the 1st lesson! And he even asked us during the prayer “and what do you say to end it?” Elder Parker answered “in the name of Jesus Christ, Amen” and he finished it. He said he’d call when we could meet again… especially if he received revelation that it’s true! By the way, to quote Maksim, “Happy Thanksgiving!”


11/23/07
Good meeting with English speaking Aleksei today. Hasn’t been able to meet for a while, but texted us today wanting to meet. Retaught the 1st lesson, in Russian this time, and he is really desiring to know and learn more and have his questions answered. He’s a father (5 year old son) and a really good guy.


We also met with ‘Amen!’ Rasheed today. It’s been a while, but we got some pictures with him today. You really have to wonder what kind of spiritual giant he’ll be in the life to come… someone guaranteed Celestial glory must have been wise in using his agency before this life. Maybe to a select few it is given a simple purpose in life, nto to learn the attributes of Christ, or repent, to align one’s will with God, or even to prepare to account to God for this life. Perhaps it is given to those few, the charge to simply brighten the lives of others, and to bring a small piece of celestial innocence and bliss in a way only embodied, only conveyed through the innocence and belief of a naive mind and heart. I think Rasheed’s like that. Whenever you start taking yourself too seriously, or down on yourself, remember that Rasheed is praying for you! AMEN!


11/24/07
Met with Vitali today. Feels like we’re starting back down the road to baptism with him (reviewed 1st lesson)


Tonight had Constantine give us the truth, that he has his own church and doesn’t want to offend us, but would rather remain as friends / acquaintances and that we should come over some time for dinner. An interesting contrast from other investigators who have stopped meeting with us.
Rasheed: “My God does not allow me to meet with you” in a text… after a 3 hour first meeting, watched Restoration and The Testaments, cried and understood that if it’s true, that Joseph was a prophet, it’s urgent for him to know. He’s serving a mission for Blagodat church in Uzbekistan now.


Salamat: younger, atheist who was sincerely interested in learning more about God. Parents told him we were a cult and they told us they were Muslims (more cultural than practicing). His mom told us over the phone to not call or meet with him again.


Tatiyana: Let us in tracting, first and only so far (to do a full lesson), called a few days later and she’d spoken with her son, friends, and pastor. Didn’t want to know more because of their influence. Stopped by once more and dropped off a Plan of Salvation brochure (she’s a widow).


11/25/07
Well, today was quite an interesting and historic day, one to be remembered for the rest of my mission and even life. The first time I’ve ever been in a church meeting which has been interrupted by the police. Basically, we are missing one of three registrations / licenses we need in order to do missionary work and we can’t do any missionary work until we have that registration. So, for the next week (at minimum), we can’t talk to anyone, tell anyone that we are missionaries, or even meet with current investigators. We’re just foreigners… tourists, or else we’ll be DEPORTED.


11/26/07
Second day of our dead days. Yesterday, we wasted all of Sunday playing scum (card game) and eating some mediocre plov at our apartment. We literally spent all evening doing that… and I’m really against doing it again. The adversary is at work here, but the Lord is too. The more we do to prepare and to make the most of our time in this next week or so, the more ready, prepared we will be when the way is clear and the blessings in view.


Elder Burgess shared a really good spiritual thought about this in our district meeting today. He compared our situation to that of the family of Jared in Ether. How, at the tower of Babel and confounding of tongues, Jared said to his brother in Ether 1:38, “Go and inquire of the Lord whether He will drive us out of the land, and if He will drive us out of the land, cry unto Him whither we shall go, and who knoweth but the Lord will carry us forth into a land which is choice above all the earth? And if it so be, let us be faithful unto the Lord, that we may receive it for our inheritance.” Just consider “the land” that we are being driven out of as the time we are being robbed of the next few days. The opportunities to find and teach, but if this is the case, let the Lord prepare for us another land, another time, abounding with opportunities, choice above all the earth, of other times. Who knows what inheritance, what reward, what blessings lie in wait to be realized upon the enduring well of this trial.


Discovered one of two tools today for enduring it well and preparing to meet ‘where [the Lord] will meet [us]’ Ether 1:42
1. No smoking program
2. Family history


11/27/07
Happy birthday Elder Parker. Elder Watkins and I are working on a eulogy to his youth. Too much time writing Kallene’s letter, more details on Sunday and an update on what we did today.


11/28/07
Happy Thanksgiving! It was really last week, but we forget about that and are celebrating today. Our p-day during dead days and we had a good Thanksgiving breaded chicken dinner w/mashed potatoes, carrots, gravy, cranberry sauce, and rolls. It was good. Now, everyone else is playing scum again… just like we wasted Sunday.


More details about Sunday. We picked up Peter around 9am and brought him to church on the 136. So we’re sitting in sacrament meeting and Sveta is translating for Bro Schiffler as he’s speaking and she looked to the left out through the door into the foyer. She looked back at Elder Parker and motioned for him to come up and she walked out. Elder Parker looked back for Elder Watkins to translate, but he had already gone out the back of the chapel to see what was going on. So Elder Parker went and started translating for Bro Schiffler. Bro Schiffler said he knew how Elder Parker felt, because he had to translate a lot in the Czech Republic, even for Elder Russell M. Nelson once. As the meeting continued, President Imangezeev left the chapel and after a few minutes, Elder Watkins came back into the room, sat next to me, and whispered “take off your nametag and don’t talk to anyone.” He went and told Sister Pinkal and Niporka, and Elder Burgess the same, and then passed a note back to me saying “take off your nametag and if anyone asks, don’t show them your passport, but you would be more than willing to write down your name.”


As Elder Parker was walking back to his seat after translating, Elder Vincent grabbed him and whispered to him “take off your tag, sit down, and don’t talk to anyone.” After the closing prayer, Sveta announced the police were here to check out our church’s registration and the documents of some members. They walked down the aisle and we just told them we didn’t have our passports and that we’re from America (I honestly didn’t have mine on me). We watched another hour of General Conference on tape delay and the last hour of church was cancelled.


After the police left, Sveta and Mariana gathered us missionaries into the primary room. We were informed that we are missing a registration which we need in order to proselyte. The law had changed in 2005 apparently without notice. So we can’t do missionary work until we have that registration, which will be a minimum of 10 days from Monday, Nov 26. That’s our situation now.


And so, yesterday, we spent the greater part of the day at a center for adults and teenagers with cerebral palsy. There, they are not dependent, but the center is an opportunity for them to learn skills and earn money creating artwork - pottery, bead artwork, silk paintings, etc. So we basically designed some bells out of clay and painted some silk paintings. An interesting service, because it felt more like free labor than service, but we’ll see where it goes.


We also had English club, but according to the law, it was without a spiritual thought and just really awkward. It seems that for some, English club is not complete without the spiritual thought.


So today, we had Thanksgiving and played scum, did a scripture chase from Elder Vincent, talked with Gary DeSpain (pilot), read the Almaty branch history and then came back home to give myself a haircut. I think it turned out pretty well, but it’s pretty short and my head is going to be cold tomorrow!


Well, in honor of Thanksgiving and in tribute to the situation we are in now, I’m going to write a blessings list:
* Good food
* Natural intelligence
* A good upbringing
* Brothers & sisters
* Brothers & sisters who are strong in the gospel
* Senior missionaries
* Parents
* No worries about $
* Book of Mormon
* Living in dorms
* Pens & paper
* Journals
* A sound mind
* Full use of my faculties
* A knack for writing
* Inherited traits
* Email
* My college experience
* Spiritual maturity
* Observation / discernment
* My hat
* Living apostles
* Living prophet
* General Conference
* Memory
* Attitude
* Brooms
* Friends from H.S.
* My health
And by the way, Elder Vincent informed us that on Sunday he called President Pieper, who called Elder Rasband, who called Elder Uchtdorf and informed him of our situation. And it came back from Elder Uchtdorf to President Powell to Elder Vincent that as the Quorum of the twelve meet this Thursday in the temple, they will be praying and discussing our situation. That’s pretty important and it makes you think about what we’re doing here.


11/29/07
Baked some nice banana bread today and stopped by Vladimir and Nina’s to give it to them. In return, Nina gave us some Holodetz. The meat gelatin dish of Russia / Ukraine / Kazakhstan (complete with some mustard dressing). Have yet to try it, but smelling it is almost enough. Tomorrow will be the trial, with Elder Burgess and Parker filming.


11/30/07
Living the life of an exiled missionary… removed from the work but still holding and mindful of the calling, and still haven’t tasted of the dross that is holodetz.


Our day basically consisted of some picture printing, a big taco lunch, and an English and spiritual lesson with Yegor. Dima taught the entirety of the spiritual lesson for the fact that we are under a preaching, teaching, and testifying lockdown. It was really good and any chance will be good for Yegor and Dima to connect and become friends. Both are in a similar situation, being the only members in their respective families and of a similar age. It’s an honor to associate with the youth here, mostly Dima, Max, and Gosha… seeing the future of the church in these young men who all decided to join the church for themselves, in their teenage years. They really are the pioneers of our church today and tomorrow’s leaders (branch, stake presidents, bishops, missionaries, etc.


12/1/07
Went to Kok Tebe today, couldn’t see anything for the fog. Took some nice pictures with the Beatles there… had a snowball fight or two and walked around for a while. Walked back down and at some undercooked chicken and fettuccine style pasta, with lemon bars. And you better not knock the lemon bars, because lemons cost 685 tenge a pop and Sister Pinkal’s cooking self confidence isn’t quite the highest. Then we hopped a taxi to Sister Ardagul’s and Arman’s and home taught them.


Interesting time with Elder Parker right now, too much down time to be our normal missionary hard-at-work selves and the personality differences are magnified. I’ve got some self improvements to make and some more positive thinking and acting to embark upon.


12/2/07
Last fast Sunday of the year and it was a great testimony meeting to close things off. Dima shared a very powerful and convincing testimony, and the growth he’s experiencing is evident. Especially since he’s started the process for gathering and submitting his mission papers, he has had a dramatic change in attitude toward helping us missionaries. We had him help us review the plan of salvation with Yegor last week, and he’s been anxious to help ever since. This past Thursday, we had a meeting with Yegor while under the ban, so we taught Yegor some English (we are allowed to still, and still allowed to hold English club) and Dima came and taught him about the gospel. He answered his questions (specifically about the actual physical process of a baptism) and provided some good support and strength especially concerning the change in lifestyle, added responsibility, but also the blessings and positive changes of the gospel and church membership. Olesya and Gosha also bore testimony, which I think was really good for Yegor to hear (his 2nd time at church!)


Started studying Kazakh today. With all this time we have (and it looks like we won’t be proselyting the majority of this week either… Friday at the earliest) it seems as though it’s an opportunity to have a personal MTC for Kazakh in our apartment. I’m going to try and schedule and think things out so I’m using my time more efficiently for the next week. It’s interesting to see what changes or things are happening as the work stops and certain missionaries tend to view themselves as what the government would have… and not still as the call letter states. Planning, out the window. Casualness, welcome and track your muddy shoes all over on your way in. I admit, it’s difficult to focus and retain in mind, much less in action, the calling and responsibility we bear as ministers of Christ, especially when we are not acting or pursuing that course in sharing the Gospel. But I feel as though, if there is something we are to be preparing for, some great blessing or something at the end of this trial, if we endure well, I feel we are definitely far from qualifying for it at the moment, maybe tomorrow, we’ll see!


12/3/07
Interesting day today. District meeting picked up some correction and edification concerning study habits, took pictures of memorial / glory park and experienced my first Russian Orthodox Mass.


A very uncomfortable situation tomorrow with Sister Arina too!


12/4/07
Bad situation skirted, we just met with Yegor (and Max). He’s ready. Ate something nasty today, maybe a bad onion or something. Feels like my stomach is telling me to eat and go to the bathroom at the same time.


12/5/07
About time to experience some Ukrainian borsch, of which I’ve heard much ado. We’re caught in a strange place, the land of missionaries living the law of the land, but not fully engaged in the work for which the land is intended. Basically, we’re still missionaries, called of God and adhering to the rules and commands… but without the blessing of teaching the Gospel or finding those prepared, kind of reminds me of the Revelation scripture, “lukewarm will be spewed out” or something like that.


Tried it, Ukrainian borsch that is, and it’s good. Holodetz… yeah, it’s pukeworthy. Here’s the basic description… boiled meat in a gelatin consistency, with some whitish layer on top (not sure what it’s made of). It smells disgusting, but I brought myself to eating some and we have pictures to prove it.


Met with Ilya tonight on a bus stop, and he took us to the place where he has dance class / lessons. He introduced us to some of his friends, and basically Elder Parker and I got hit on by 17 year old girls for 10 min. Once they found out we’re American… oh boy! “How do you like Kazakh girls?” The first question… “are you married?” I became ‘business man!’ when they heard what I was interested in studying. And much too excited when they found out that I’m 19. Let’s just say, if I’m ever really desperate in America and can’t find a woman, just move to Kazakhstan and make sure girls know you’re American and single!


12/6/07
Went to the falcon farm today in the mountains south of Almaty. Took a lot of pictures there and got to hold the Kazakh national bird (steppe eagle). A pretty big contrast from the world birds of prey center in Boise, especially considering the conditions in which the birds are kept. PETA and greenpeace would have a fit if they found out about that place!


Afterwards we had some shashleek at a restaurant up the road and got some good photos at the river. Tried lamb and cow tongue today… neither are anything special. I still like horse and chicken hamburger best.


12/7/07
Yegor’s baptismal interview was today, with Elder Vincent conducting the interview and Elder Watkins translating. After the interview, Elder Vincent brought us (Elder Parker and myself) into the room with Yegor and we explained the process of the baptism and the confirmation the next day. He then told us that in times like these, it’s very appropriate to embrace each other, so we hugged Yegor. We filled out his baptismal records after that, and Elder Parker is going to baptize him and I’m going to confirm him a member of the church.


12/8/07
Those were his choices (who would baptize and who would confirm) and it will be quite the experience for me as well. I’m just striving to be worthy and in tune this entire week so I will be ready to pronounce the blessing the Lord has intended for him.


Elder Vincent had Yegor bear his testimony in the interview and Elder Vincent told us afterwards that Yegor said he knew without a doubt that Gordon B. Hinckley is a prophet, and that he loves meeting with us and the people at church and that he never wants to leave after our meetings. Elder Vincent explained to him that that is the Holy Ghost, and after baptism (with confirmation) he will be able to feel that feeling all the time, if he is worthy of it.


As far as our missionary status (in the eyes of the Kazakh government), our predicament continues. Yesterday, an official said he could get us the proper documents by today, for a $200 bribe. The churhc doesn’t work that way, so Ramon and Sveta are going into the office of the prosecutor on Monday. WE might be subject to a $24k fine, but that might just be a bribe in disguise. Either way, Monday would be the earliest we can get back to work. I don’t even want to think about how much longer it could be. The opposite of the Ezra Taft Benson quote I wrote when I first arrived to KAzakhstan is true. It’s hard to feel the spirit when you’re not working… anxiously waiting, impatiently preparing.


12/9/07
Working on a Christmas slideshow for Sveta. Gathering together as many Christ pictures as I can find. It’s really good to have an assignment, something I can actually work on and accomplish right now. I’m just really really not liking the direction our district has gone with the turn of events in the last 2 weeks without “missionary” approval.


Yes Yegor is doing great. Yes, he came to church and will be baptized on Saturday… but I really can’t end each day and account to the Lord, feeling good about playing 4 or 5 rounds of scum, a card game, with His time and hunder His calling… on His errand. It’s about time I stopped shifting blame to other, man up and do what is right!


12/10/07
Great news! We’re getting our registration / accreditation. At long last, the lock is loosed and, as Elder Vincent described, the muzzles will be off. Learned a lot from district meeting today, especially from Elder Vincents spiritual thought and experiences with the Brethren. Bought myself a mouth harp and I’m going to have Brother Yedul teach me Thursday.


12/11/07
REcording some happenings from yesterday.


Concerning Yegor, Elder Vincnet told us yesterday that in all his experience in the church, and considering the many baptismal interviews he has conducted in the past; he said that Yegor is the most prepared baptismla candidate he has ever had the opportunity to interview. Pretty stout complement coming from a former stake president and area 70! And he sure does have some stories about serving among the general authorities of the church. Elder Packer, Eyring, etc.


And in yesterday’s district meeting, Elder Vincent shared a spiritual thought from which I have learned much. He talked about how the words we use have power, especially in bringing the spirit. He provided as an example an excerpt from an email sent to him by his cousin. His cousin and his wife are currently serving as missionaries at the aba Nigeria temple. Elder Vincent explained to them, in an email, our situation in Almaty, and contrast their response with the usual “we’re praying for you.” Instead, they wrote “we will add your names to the prayer rolls in the Nigerian temple, and believe us, when Nigerians pray, one might just open his eyes to see if God himself is not standing right there”


Another example, “Preach My Gospel truly is an inspired book” compared to how President Packer presented the book when introducing it at the MTC “this handbook was conceived on the other side of the veil, and assembled here”


The little things really do make a difference!


Then Elder Vincent shared the four scriptures the teacher (president PAcker) says every missionary should know:
DC 11:21 - seek not to declare my word, but first seek to obtain my word
DC 42:6 - Go about two by two, preaching my gospel
DC 84:85 Take no thought before hand, for it will be given you in the very hour (you don’t take an outline to the pulpit, you take your scriptures)
DC100:5-8 - lift up your voices, speak the words which will be given you by God


12/12/07
The day has come and the burden has been lifted… we can work again! Got our approval / certificates, met with Peter and he is great. Reading, praying, and with time will enter the fold.


12/13/07
He expressed that he believes what we are teaching him, about Joseph Smith being a prophet… but that for some reason or another, he is afraid to ask God specifically in prayer about the truthfulness of it. He wants it to come naturally, in God’s perfect timing. I’m confident that it will come, we’ll just have to wait till after Christmas break (He’s going home to the Phillipines). Elder Parker seems to be a little less confident, or maybe it’s just his slightly overbearing nature that screams “you need to read and pray and know for yourself NOW” sometimes :) 


12/14/07
Prepping for the baptism still and working on the slideshow of Christ’s life for Christmas. It’s gonna be good.
P.S. it’s really cold outside, seriously.


12/15/07
Yegor was baptized!


12/16/07
It seems as though those nights of particularly special events, especially baptisms, time is never sufficient to record everything desired.


Yegor entered the waters of baptism yesterday night, somewhere between 6 and 7 pm. It really was a sweet experience. Especially for Elder Parker, who baptized Yegor. Brother Karen led the service, Elder Burgess played a musical number “Jesus Once of Humble Birth” and Yegor invited some of his friends, and Makseem and Azamat and one of their friends also came.


Today, in my opinion, was a more special and even more spiritual experience than yesterday. Yegor was up late watching a soccer game and wasn’t at the sacrament meeting when 10am came. The primary performed the program, and Yegor came in near the end, Elder Parker had called and woken him up. We did the confirmation after the primary finished, and I had the privilege to give him the gift of the HOly Ghost. It was a different presence of the spirit than I have ever before felt. Usually the spirit speaks or touches me in the heart simply, and with a peace of mind / conscience and a steadiness and calmness of soul. Or occasionally, by the means of a tingly sensation (especially in the case of songs or scriptures triggering the HOly Ghost). But today, as I stood in the circle of Melchizedek Priesthood holders, Elders Burgess, Watkins, Parker, Vincent, and President Imangazeev, I felt the burning of the bosom so described int eh doctrine and covenants. Even as I was pronouncing the blessing, I felt that warmth not emanating from nerves or blushing as often is the case for me, but streaming from the spirit to me. And as I blessed Yegor, simple words only came to mind. Blessed him with the right to have the companionship of the Holy Ghost as far as he is worthy, that he can feel the spirit always, that the Lord has forgiven him, that the Lord and Savior is and always will be with him, that through repentance, the Lord will always be with him, and in that moment, although the burning in the bosom continued, no other words came to my mind and I knew that I was to close the blessing. It truly was unlike any other experience I’ve had in exercising the MElchizedek priesthood.


And to add another sweet experience or two, I was able to participate in the ordinations of Dima Tsai and MAks Imangazeev to the office of Elder and receive the Melchizedek Priesthood. President Imangazeev, all the elders (except Elder Parker, who was preparing something for president Cranney) and President Cranney all participated, with Elder Watkins giving Dima the priesthood. Then Dima joined the circle as President Imangazeev gave Max the priesthood. Yegor had the opportunity to sit in, and we’re going to teach him about the priesthood this week, so he can receive the Aaronic priesthood next Sunday and begin participating in the blessing and passing of the sacrament.


12/17/07
This past weekend was not only Yegor’s baptism and confirmation, but also zone conference. We had great opportunities to feel an outpouring of the spirit as well as to receive counsel and instruction from President Cranney.
* Concept of
   * Doctrine - why? Unchanging truth. Atonement, bodies are temples, the Lord’s love, etc.
   * Principle - What? Too often we accept principles as the base (built from doctrine)
   * Implementation - How? This doesn’t matter or make sense w/o the others (built from principles)
* From Elder Bednar
   * Brother of Jared’s stones, the Lord touched each one by one and that is His pattern in missionary work.


12/18/07
A week from Christmas, and it doesn’t feel that way at al. The work has been fairly uneventful in the time since that baptism. But Kazakhstan’s independence day was Sunday, the 16th, and they have ad yesterday and today as holidays to observe, so that might be a substantial contributor to the current slowness of the week.


We taught (that is, Dima and Elder Parker) Yegor about the priesthood today and he is preparing to receive the Aaronic as soon as he feels ready. We’re pushing for this Sunday, and we’ll let him know how President Craney feels about it.


12/19/07
Ditched Elder Parker today. He got off the bus, but the spirit told me to stay and get the number of Andrei. Everything worked out all right. Tried ‘bussing’ today for the first time. Riding the bus and talking to people, rather than contacting them while walking on the street. Not bad, 7 invitations and 2 contacts in an hour.


12/20/07
Shortened up the slide show today, picked up a freshly slaughtered ram for Sister Galina, got lost trying to find Vova and Tamara’s house. Got stiffed on our meeting with Yegor, finished the slide show, and had English club. A pretty deadening day, without much success days as these always seem to bring up a reflective mood and ask a man to think, consider what is most important to him...what purpose has he? Also it asks the question, what can I be doing better. It is difficult to make the boundary though between such recollection and discouragement. And on days like these, I feel all Parkered out.


12/21/07
Maksim and great meeting today. Ate some real armenian shashliek today. Was good.


12/22/07
Just one small example of the Lord’s mindfulness concerning each of his children. Yesterday, the lesson we planned for Maksim was about following the prophet, but he asked the question in the beginning of our lesson, “how do you deal with aggression or hatred, or anger?” Talking about how he sometimes gets short-tempered with others. No coincidence that President Hinckley’s last talk in General Conference was about that very subject! Small miracles like that, is often how the Lord works… and that is when men consider His wisdom or small means as foolishness.


Today was the branch Christmas party and the debut of the shortened slideshow (8 min limit). Despite technical difficulties, it came off well. And it finally feels like Christmas season!


12/23/07
A white Christmas is in store this year! Strange to think about caroling in a foreign new ward two years ago, and learning to play bunko a year ago already.


Anointed two blessings today. Sister Nina right after church and Sister Ardugal later in the day. Elder Burgess and Max were there with Sister Nina, and it was Max’s first blessing as an Elder. The second, Elder Parker gave the sealing and blessings to Sister Ardugal.


12/24/07
We celebrated Christmas with the Vincents and Gary Despain today.


12/25/07
Talked to the family. New senior couple flew in today, the Wellings, will be in Astana.


12/26/07
An interesting time of year when viewed from an unknown perspective. Never before have I been away from home for Christmas for the holidays. Yet no pining for the family, no holiday ho-hums or the like. A simple phone call, an hour long and a half a world away suffices and it’s back to work!


Although it does have some effect on the spirit when not a single other soul around you is aware of the spirit of Christmas. The spirit of the season is not in the air, but it is in the bottles here. Flowing freely a week later and half a heart emptier. The coming of another year and the shaking off of the past weighs on the minds of Kazakhs only slightly less heavenly than the anticipated celebration of a new year and new experiences does. All accentuated by drinks of choice, or moreso by drinks of addiction or cultural leftovers. And one of the two greatest gifts ever given goes uncelebrated. Silently, patiently passed by the push to ready for the new year. The miracle of the birth of the Son of God further remains foreign to a non-Christian nation. Half the world pauses in recollection, flights are cancelled, children miss school, families gather, choirs praise the Lord and angels reply in grand amen… while car horns in Almaty keep their steady time… the streets as dirty, noisy, and cold as the days before and days to come. So as you read of His birth from the gospel of Luke and enjoy the live nativities and choirs and carols and Christmas love and joy, as the whole world seems at peace on a Christmas eve or night; remember that it’s just December in Almaty, it’s just cold, and we’re all just waiting till January… and be glad you know the Savior was born.


12/27/07
Happy Birthday dad! Talked with a 6’10’’ guy today (Alec), got his contact information and pretty excited about trying to baptize him (he’ll have to go on his knees!) Also, talked to a guy from Kenya, Charles, who spoke English and is here visiting a friend. He says that he is a tour guide for safaris and Mt Kenya, so he is somewhat used to the cold (-27C yesterday).


Today also ate at Vladimir and Nina’s. It was gross, except some of the cakes and tea. Fish heads, undercooked chicken. Grateful that Vladimir came to our defense ‘they don’t like fish, because it’s gross!’ when Nina was pressing why we hadn’t touched the fish heads.


12/28/07
Good weekly planning, finally differed from the ‘by the book’ method and it feels like a much more useful way. With Elder Burgess on a switch right now. Got one contact tonight, spoke with a few Jehovah’s witnesses and scared a New Life member with the Book of Mormon. Oh the life of a missionary in -10C weather!


12/29/07
Met Mikhail today. He was the first counselor in the branch presidency back when the Urbans lived here, but apparently has been offended by Brother Zhastalap. Elder Burgess and I gave him some good missionary TLC, and we’re building a friendship, trying to bring him back to the fold.


Met with Brother Yedil again, and learned how to really play the mouth harp.


12/30/07
Apparently we had another earthquake last night (3:30am that is). But my fire-alarm tempered nights in May Hall have desensitized me to the point that I literally can sleep through an earthquake.


Today at church Yegor received the Aaronic priesthood and the office of a priest. He can’t come to church next week, but the following Sunday he’s going to bless the sacrament! We still have to buy him a tie though.


And the next most exciting thing today was almost getting arrested by a pair of chump Kazakh policemen. I was trying to talk with a guy from Turkey on a bus stop (no one else there but us three), when a cop car pulled up, they started talking to the Turkish guy, so I walked back over to Elder Parker and we started to cross the street. The policemen called us back over, tried to get 200 dollars from each of us (a ‘fine’ for not having our original passports with us… even though I had an official copy from the US embassy). We got Sveta on the phone and she got us out of it. She chewed them out. He had us come into the back of his car, where it was ‘warmer’. So I’ve been in the back of a cop car on two continents, we’ll see what happens back in Moscow.


12/31/07
Hey, it’s over!


1/1/08
The new year is wrung in with fireworks of all illegal kinds (as far as America would be concerned), shot from apartment windows and the parking lots below.


Personally, I’m bringing it in as always, with resolutions! Although this year’s come with necessary adaptations (a little more missionary oriented than usual), this years are as follows:
* Flossing once every day
* Play one hymn on the mouth harp
* Buy new toothbrushes every month
* Read true to the faith
* Excercising twice a week
* One compliment / thank you / uplifting thought shared with companion once a day
* Live by the richest man in babylon finance principle (1/10 tithe, 1/10 charity, 1/10 save, 7/10 live)
* Finish the DC, P of GP, and NT
Today’s thought: thanks for the macaroni!


1/2/08
Couldn’t write yesterday, was on a split with Elder Watkins. It’s true, you don’t realize what you have until it’s taken away. Pretty sure I really like being companions with Elder PArker. It’ll be difficult adjusting to life and missionary work with someone else if he’s out with the next transfer (a week from tomorrow).


Today’s thought: thanks for being my companion!


1/3/08
A few uplifting things from Kasim. He told the sisters on Tuesday that this year’s new year is the first he’s been able to remember in a long time, thanks to us (for teaching him the Word of Wisdom). That really means something to see and hear about the changes and improvements people make with the help of the Lord and the missionaries.


Then, last night we talked to Maksim and he related an experience which he had yesterday. He got mad at a coworker and stormed out of work… but remember the lesson we had on the prophet and remembered reading President HInckley’s “slow to anger” talk. He prayed and he prayed the hardest and most sincerely he ever has. Then he read form the Book of Mormon (Children’s picture book edition) and the Liahona and his anger melted away. Maksim might not be making it to church quite consistently yet, but he is progressing and becoming a better person every day!


1/4/08
A little surprise today, Elder Watkins is leaving tomorrow at 6am (Freak… that’s about all I can do to describe it!)


1/5/08
First experience as a threesome today. Because Elder Watkins was sent back to Moscow today, early this morning, Elder Burgess is living with Elder Parker and me for this week… that is until the unknown Elder arrives Saturday! We still have no clue why this week-before-the-transfer emergency transfer happened, but maybe Elder Vincent will shed some light on the subject in the coming days.


Met an American from Kansas teaching Economics here at KIMEP, and he said he’s never known a Mormon he didn’t like… but not so interested because his wife thinks we’re going to hell. Add that to the list of Turkish, Kenyan, Korean, Egyptian, Hungarian, and all other nationalities we’ve come in contact with here in Almaty.


We taught a lesson to a young man, Sasha, today who brought his tiny baby Chihuaha into the lesson. The dog was wearing a ‘love you’ coat… and Sasha is interested in studying and understanding the Book of Mormon.


WE figured it out though, why people tend to go off when talking with missionaries. Think of the last time an average person has had a religious conversation. A ‘lesson’ with the missionaries is their safest opportunity to release their thoughts, beliefs, concerns, etc. without any thought of embarrassing themselves… no matter how crazy or far out they are. Kind of like an outlet or religious therapy.


1/6/08
Another Sunday without a branch presidency, but we managed to get by.


1/7/08
Russian Orthodox Christmas, but doesn’t seem to mean much to people here in Almaty. By means slightly less than honorable or intentional, we found out from the APs that Elder Anderson should be coming down this Friday or Saturday. That will bring our adventure as a threesome to a close, so only about 5 more days to make the most of the situation.


I have already learned that you should never forget to put yourself in your companion’s shoes. So often are my own feelings or thoughts, or the feelings of ward members or investigators, or the people on the streets or in the buses… that I forget about the person who’s closest to me. This happens too often in regular life too. We’re so accustomed to our friends, family, spouses, that we just come to think that you don’t think about them. The constants are overlooked and we forget simple acts of service, or even sincerely talking with them every once in a while. Maybe a relationship seems right, as though everything has been worked out, all is well… and it becomes all too easy to forget about each other’s feelings. Yeah… I think that’s an important lesson/principle to understand in any marriage.


I’m also beginning to more greatly appreciate some of the talents and gifts given me from God (or that I have been developing from the eons before I came to earth). Like, the gifts of knowledge and wisdom and the ability to observe… we really can’t understand all that is given to us, but we should do our best.


1/8/08 
Met with Vitali. He’s still not personally prepared for baptism, but by the beginning of February he will give a date for sometime in Feb. Ate at least 5 kilos between district meeting and Calzones and Vitali’s bean soup, plov, and sala!


1/9/08
Ate with Gary DeSpain, meeting with the infamous Rafael. Something’s up with me. I’ll need to get Heavenly Father to help me with it in my prayers and study tomorrow.


1/10/08
Met with Mikhail, a new investigator for the other Elders. Also met with Aleksei, by myself, a little strange. Found out that the next two weeks are probably going to be the most interesting of my mission. I’m going to elaborate tomorrow.


1/11/08 - Almaty: Christian Anderson
New companion, new transfer, new experiences… Elder Anderson reminds me of how I would picture Seth as a missionary, at least at the moment.


1/12/08
President Paul lunch today. Got some good instruction from him, need to write tomorrow though.


1/13/08
By tomorrow, I mean the day after tomorrow. More great things to write on the next day. Most importantly… Vitali’s getting baptized!


1/14/08
Another journal catchup study time!


Run down
I am currently serving with Elder Christian Anderson in the same area in Kazakhstan. Elder Burgess and Elder Parker are serving together in the other area, and Elder Watkins is reportedly home! Elder Anderson arrived on the same flight as President Paul of the Quorum of the Seventy (First counselor to President Pieper in the Europe East Area). Currently, Elder Anderson is without registration/accreditation as a missionary… as we were in December… so the area and companionship is in need of some creativity and ingenuity to make the best of the next two weeks (time he’ll need to get registered). We’ve discovered some big records issues in the branch… and so some time, perhaps, a substantial amount, will be dedicated to fixing those problems and updating records. Several members either not in record at all or who need to have records transferred, baptisms not on record, incorrect birth dates, unrecorded priesthood ordinations, address changes, etc.


Although today we managed some one-man contacting, without much success, and we’re looking a lot more into the tools we have available at the branch (films, making an FHE kit, etc.)


President Paul gave a fireside Saturday night, but we had the chance to sit and receive counsel from him for an hour or so. He shared some really good thoughts and experiences.


Testimony
Indeed He did love, did live, has lived, now lives, and will live for us. To think, a God would descend to earth, live and suffer subject to those who falsely proclaimed to worship His Father, suffer a humiliation so low, that He himself has not the words to describe it, as illustrated in DC 19. All for the single purpose of saving man, a creation lower than the dusts of the earth. 


But because of that life, that condescension, it is not so. Man may be lower than the dusts of the earth, but only because he is a seed, planted and filled with all the potential of a God. And only because of the Christ’s sacrifice, only thanks to His mercy and the love of the Father, will we ever crack the surface and from there, with his grace, we are to become the redwoods of eternity. Man is as nothing, but within him is something… the makings of a God. Only tapped by and through the sacrifice of the Son.


1/15/08
Meeting with Brother Yedeel today. He’s really gone off the deep end. Crazy ideas about what Jesus taught in the first 30 years of his life… etc. Good meeting with Maksim about fasting. He’s coming to church, or he owes us Snickers.


1/16/08
Most important from today
* Learned how to solve the first two rows of a Rubik’s cube, thanks to Elder Anderson
* Meeting with Vitali
* Bought food for the week


We met with Vitali in preparation for his baptismal date next Saturday (26th). We found out that he has, in the recent past, drunken vodka.


We talked about prayer, and he told us a little about what he read yesterday from gospel principles… about obedience specifically. He was trying to change the subject to something more pleasant, but the spirit led our lesson to fasting. He’s going to fast tomorrow, and we started after finishing off the delicious plov and tea at their home. He still can and will be baptized Jan 26. That’s the power of faith, prayer, and fasting.


1/17/08
Really cool guy we met on the street today, Vladimir, who said he’d come to church Sunday with his wife. This whole companion who can’t preach thing is getting to me. We’ll see what tomorrow’s planning and study brings as far as strength, comfort, and change!


1/18/08
Maksim with Aruzhan and Elder Burgess today. Good little member helper. New home teaching list… see if we can’t get this branch reactivated!


1/19/08
First opera of my life… I’m so close to conquering Rubik!


1/20/08
I like sacrament, Samat will be baptized. Still doing damage control on the secretary and financials.


1/21/08
Happy birthday Abe! Good district meeting today, I went with spiritual thought. Ate some Kazakh Pizza and Vitali called, ready for baptism on Saturday!


1/22/08
President Cranney is here. Baptism will be delayed, really good meeting with Azamat and Maksim.


1/23/08
We received 2 packages, from Kallene and Kaccee and the Allens. Although late Christmas packages they were, they were still very welcome.


Had a great interview with President Cranney today. REally have come out with a new found conviction to just follow the Spirit. The promptings in my mind and heart are too quickly justified, and the opportunity is already passed. But he’s given me some advice which I will apply… telling my companion (strength in numbers), physically flicking the ‘shoulder devil’ whispering those justifications and doubts in my ear. And CONQUEST OF RUBIK’S CUBE.


1/24/08
Helping the sisters put together family home evening kits - how to hold it so that we can build for strength… like Elder Bednar told President Cranney in Moscow!


1/25/08
Great day. Awesome meeting with Maksim (the first with Yegor present as a member). And Yegor’s prayers, not sure if I’ve ever heard more sincere! I think it really helped Maksim.


1/26/08
Vitali ready for the baptism next Saturday, shared Ether 12:27 and my weakness (on bus, not listening to the spirit and not talking with red beanie boy) and how, with repentance, Christ’s mercy is enough. Taught the law of chastity, about FHE. Dealt with that deceiver Yerbol again, met an Aussie on the way back from Sister Ardagul’s, raised Catholic but not that religious.


1/27/08
Vitali was interviewed by Elder PArker today, we were a little worried because President Cranney was thinking about moving the baptism another week or two, but all came out alright.


Two new people at church today, Ten (met on the street Wednesday night) and Vladimir. Ten and Brother Ku hit it off, seeing as they’re Korean! We’ve got a meeting set up for Tuesday, should be interesting if we’re teaching in Russian, and Brother Ku will help in Korean.


Really good, spiritual sacrament meeting today, Brother Zhastalap is dealing with some problems right now, so we’re praying for him! Truly on a mission you being to see and feel and experience the kind of life God has intended for you all along.


1/28/08
A day of rejoicing, reflection, and remembrance. President Gordon B. Hinckley, our beloved prophet, has passed away. Elder Anderson and I were in the midst of companionship study, reading from the twelfth chapter of Preach my Gospel about how we are to plan and hold a baptismal service when Elder Parker, our district leader, called. His first words, “President Cranney just called…” brought a terror with themselves, inherent with an unexpected phone call from the mission president, but even more dreadful because President Cranney had expressed some concern over Vitali’s baptism planned only 2-3 weeks after he had given in to the temptation to drink vodka. But he’s repented of that, fasted as well, and all is on the up and up. So naturally, I was preparing for the devastation to hear that the baptism planned for this Saturday was to be cancelled or postponed. And then he gave us the news, “President Hinckley died”. “Wow” was just about all I could say. “Thanks, see you at twelve”. Pretty funny, a good little lightheartedness. Elder Anderson and I sat in silence and pondering for a moment, decided to read his closing remarks from last conference… decided they were too short and read his Sunday morning talk as well. And then poured out our hearts in a prayer of thanks for his service and dedication and in support of the current leadership of the church. The first English prayer I’ve had with a companion since the MTC.


1/29/08
Wow, already winter is approaching the third and final act that is February. Today was an interesting day… we played soccer and basketball against Kazakhstan’s best special olympics soccer team. They beat us, Elder Parker was a little flustered. “We would have won if they weren’t so dirty!”


Two meetings fell through… but somehow my spirits were not low in the least. WE were stood up by Anton, where we had a member-present lesson planned and then again after English club by Ten. We were supposed to meet with him and Brother Ku. At home, a day we had planned for with an anticipated 2 new investigators, 2 sit-downs, and 2 member presents fell to 0. But, disappointing as it was, it was amazing to see how the spirit buoyed me up by the means of a simple post-English club spiritual thought.


1/30/08
Dang it, haircut… wayy to late


1/31/08
Yegor is awesome. He’s trying to share the gospel with his family. He wants to quit work and school and just go on a mission right now. But he’ll go in a year and a half when he finishes school. I’ll be home by then, and maybe have the chance to see him through the temple, or at the MTC!


2/1/08
He’s told us that he’s tried to tell his family about the church, and that they are probably full of him inviting them to church or to know more about everything. He’s got a job at the moment with a schedule of 3 working days, then 3 off days, which means he misses church half the time. But he’s praying and wanting to figure out a way to come. It’s up to him, whether to quit his job, or convince his boss to give him Sundays off.


2/2/08
Before that spiritual thought, we invited everyone to the baptism which happened today. I felt impressed right there… after not really having prepared a spiritual thought, to explain what baptism is, what would actually be there. The spirit was strong and I could feel him testifying to those people of the truthfulness of my words. It was a real freaking pick me up.


2/3/08
Yesterday approached 16 Dec 2007 as the best day of my mission. Vitali was baptized among his now fellow church members, and Dima and Maks finally received their mission calls. Maks baptized Vitali, because Dima had an operation on his leg earlier this week, and after the baptismal service, Dima and Maks opened their call letters, respectively. Dima is going to serve in the Russia Rostov mission and Maks in Kiev, Ukrainian speaking. Samat, Sergey (brother of the Canada girl Irina) and Maksim had the chance to see and experience it all.


2/4/08
Elder Anderson finally received his registration today! And the first person with whom he spoke, he gave a Book of Mormon to… It’s great to have a full companionship after 25 days.


2/5/08
Trying to help Bakhtyor to better understand the gospel, and prepare him to eventually receive the Melchizedek Priesthood. It will take some time, and getting the spirit deeply involved, but with God all things are possible.


After English club, Elder Anderson had a good talk with George, who lived on Lake Eerie for 3 months. Says he’s come to church Sunday!


2/6/08
On Medeyoo, found music director Anatoli. Little signs of the Lord’s hand, plus prompting to call Timur on the bus.


2/7/08
Finished switch with Elder Burgess today. Met with Sergey… who wants to be baptized, but is from a city an hour outside of Bishkek and there his family resides, so he needs area presidency approval before he can be given a baptismal commitment. He collects honey as a hobby and gave us some today.


2/8/08
More “service” at the ??TB?? Center, playing soccer and basketball with kids there. Made brownies for Peter and Sister Khodzhaeva… like the sons of Mosiah journeying in the wilderness, that’s how I felt today!


2/9/08
9 month mark! Really really good meeting with Vasi (17 year old) where we talked about teaching by the spirit in our introduction… told him that we were going to identify his presence, and then did. REally good kid, really open. We’re going to get Yegor on the next lesson (plan of salvation).


Culture night, dinner and a show up in the mountains. Kazakh home cooking is better (especially Beshparmak) but it was still good. Late, almost New Year’s late, but tomorrow is still Sunday.


2/10/08
Gen came to church (man whose views reminded me of Nehor or Korihor teachings, about needing no Christ and needing to ‘free’ ourselves of our bodies.


PRobably my last meeting with Yerlan tonight. 2 hours and he is so afraid that we are right, that he will justify himself by any, any means possible. And if he can’t ‘so what do you think about free labor?”


2/11/08
Service rendered in carrying and filling Sister Nina’s water jugs. Had to chop a hole in the ice under the pump in order to fill the jugs. Elder Anderson took some pictures to preserve that memory.


District meeting about goal setting really did something to rekindle that urgency and desire to strive to accomplish all that we are capable of accomplishing. A few thoughts have come to mind concerning the next transfer (the 42 days, 6 weeks from Feb 23 to April 4) and dubbing it “the transfer”. Setting some seriously considered and prayed for and pondered goals, and striving to accomplish things which never have before been expected. Preparation for that begins tonight.


2/12/08
Plan of salvation with Vasya, good meeting with Maksim about law of chastity and repentance as an everyday thing. He’s on his way.


2/13/08
Good little meeting / gathering with Zhan-bol-lat, Marlen, and their Muslim friends. Sister Niporka told our story, basically, and she did a really good job. Now I’m back with Elder Parker on a split.


2/14/08
Meeting with Sasha, lots and lots of questions. Still on split with Elder Parker.


2/15/08
Service at home for children with TB (playing soccer & bball). NEw map for new meetinghouse for new ...  Rasheed “is yours the building with all the birds on it?”


2/16/08
Valentine’s branch party / service project tonight. Maksim needs to become a member… vasya came, still working on new building map. Bakhtyor, we’re not sure how to help him (pathological liar and arguer) and Sister Pinkal freaking out about transfers.


2/17/08
Just about the least expected turn of events fell upon my lot today. President Cranney called this morning and “the Lord needs you in Russia.” Really didn’t know what to think, and handed the phone to Elder Anderson and continued on eating my breakfast. Elder Anderson was completely surprised, especially at my lack of reaction.


2/18/08
And I’ll say I was not prepared… flat out not knowing how to react. And so goes the peculiar work, Friday we are off to Moscow.


Today we held the last district meeting of the transfer… and the last of our “group”. We had a ‘Moroni meeting’ as described in Moroni 6:9, basically open to the spirit. Direction and suggestions by the participants with a goal / purpose in mind. As taught by Elder Vincent from DC 43:8-10.


Testimony
The Lord, the very Son of God, lived an earthly life, in subjection to the flesh, to the will of men, who stood in dust in comparison. In subjection to the will of the Father, for the single purpose of my progression and salvation. He not only gave up his breath, or sacrificed himself, but he gave his life in all its entirety. The moment He spoke His first words, the teaching of priests in the temple as a child, the healings, His baptism… all had one purpose in mind, the salvation of mankind, my own salvation.


He lived for me, He died for me, and now He lives that I may know Him. As He lived, I so shall… not in perfection, but in dedication and love. I have not only a testimony of His sacrifice, although infinite and powerful it is, but a testimony also that the very Son of God lived, loved, and died that I might live again.


2/19/08
Here’s the deal, the last few days have just flown by with a lot of things to write and absolutely no opportunity to write them. So here I am outlining a set of reminders so that I can record what I want on the plane flight to Moscow.
1. Reaction during/directly following phone call (2/28/08)
2. Sunday’s meeting (3/1/08)
3. Remainder of Moroni meeting (3/3/08)
4. Reaction of English club friends (3/11/08, 3/24/08)
5. Maksim’s farewell speech and testimony and gifts and spiritual “atomic bomb” (3/24/08)
The Church of Jesus of Latter days is more than true, there is not a single thing wrong with it. I can testify! May I, Elder Taylor? In front of whom? Tomorrow.


2/20/08
P-days of P-days. Woke up at 5:30am, finished study at 9am. Bought souvenirs at the Green market, including a sweet black “Kazakhstan” track suit. Bout a Quran (in Arabic) by the Central Mosque, and then we graced the historical instruments museum in the park. We paid for the tour, and for a little performance from our tour guide on the Dombra, Kobyiz, and Saz Sirnai. Finally found out my mouth harp’s real name, “Shankobyiz”.


Our tour guide, Karligash is a lady, a widow, with two kids… and basically straight out of a movie. Worked in her uncle’s museum for 10 years, tried to quit and break free to start a career in music, but kept coming back. A really lonely lady, probably in her 30s… who really opened up to us. But she called tonight with some problem she needs help with. Tomorrow we’ll find out all about it.


2/21/08
Add Karligash’s story as item 6 (3/24/08)... said goodbye to all the English clubbers (Amir, Zhanbulat, etc.) Goodbyes to Maksim, Gosha, Dima, etc. Didn’t get to w/ Yegor or Vitaly, but it’ll all be good someday.


2/22/08 - Sokolniki: Eric Smith
Really freaking tired. I’m a District Leader on top of the blue line. Serving with Elder Smith (he’s got two transfers left). Elder Parker is AP, and Sister Pinkal is in my district.


2/23/08
First sit down with Elder Smith. Interesting, but we definitely have a lot of potential to do a lot of good. It was with Alexander, Lidiya, and Ivan Suslovy. She’s a translator for the Liahona and church songs (currently working on the children’s songbook). Alexander is a member with the Melchizedek priesthood holder who is a practicing Russian Orthodox (crosses himself, has icon, etc.). Ivan is 14 or 15, not bad … and not active


2/24/08
Church… like a real branch -> crazy! President Mikulin is basically the man (future stake president in my book). Pretty overwhelming being district leader in a completely new and foreign area. Beddy by time.


2/25/08
Hard to imagine that only Thursday, when I was in Kazakhstan, was 4 days ago. Feels like a few weeks. The move continues, DL training beginning, and a whole lot of different to learn from and deal with.


2/26/08
Already Kazakhstan feels months in the past, yet all I know as I sit like a duck out of water in the Sokolniki branch. I’m in no-man’s land at the moment, but Elder Smith knows the members and area well enough (not to mention the language), that things are coming along. 


Had our first weekly planning, and it seems as though we’re both in store for a lot of potential growth. Opening to new ideas, and being willing to talk (in planning lessons and companionship inventory) shows we’re neither in a state of pride which will stunt our growth.


And although our investigators pool currently amounts to about 0.8 in total (Valdik), I’m anxious for what we can accomplish. See… this area, and district, seems to be at a pause in missionary work. Elders Earl and Miller are also without investigators and the sisters are new. Time to turn attention from moscow people as “closed” to the new challenge of getting past that first wall. Today I just sat down to a man on the metro and asked “how are thing?” and it opened up a conversation (where he even did most of the talking!). We’re looking into baking things for our neighbors, to introduce ourselves. Muscovites are a lot less open to cold contacting than Kazakhs… so it’ll be interesting to adapt.


2/27/08
First p-day, uneventful save a trip to the office, finding out that dad loses his job March 7, and teaching a mission prep class to Xan Cranney and then some members.


Saw Elder Pollard at the Central building too.


2/28/08
Catch up from Kazakhstan time. See 2/19/08 for reference.
1. President Cranney called Sunday before last at 8am (Almaty time, which is 5am Moscow time). I was talking to him in Russian, then in English he told me “I’m sorry Elder Taylor, but the Lord needs you here in Russia.” “Ok” was about all I could manage to get out. I wasn’t angry, or sad, but in utter shock! See, by no means was I, nor anyone else, expecting to be coming back so soon. He asked to speak with Elder Anderson, so I gave him the phone and kept on eating breakfast. Elder Anderson thought I was talking to some weird English speaking investigator, but looked at the phone and realized it was President Cranney. President told him that he was taking his companion, and Elder Anderson immediately got up and motioned for me to stand up to hug him (for comfort I guess). Anyway, probably just really surprised that I wasn’t on the floor stabbing myself or something. I’m just glad I have control over my emotions and reactions (to a certain extent).


2/29/08
Planning, meeting with Vladimir, he’s in an interesting situation. He told us how about 15 years ago, as he and his family were preparing for the temple and someone (a big, fat man with only two teeth, one on each side, like a vampire) told him that once you go to the temple, there is no going back… and he took it as you lose your freedom once you go to the temple and somehow took offense. He’s currently off church records, but he’s really nice, talkative guy (loves fishing). We’re going to find out what happened to him (excommunicated / asked for names to be removed) and do what we can to bring him back into the fold, even if it means getting Dad to send wooly buggers from America.


3/1/08
Happy first of March of the first March of two Marches of my mission! Finally got everything organized and moved in.


Met with Vladimir and Lyudmila, great people. But in a weird situation, not married to each other, and not in that kind of relationship. Both are old, and they’re just good friends, look after each other. She loves America, and he’s recovering from a stroke he had just under a year ago. 


Refer back to 2/19/08
2. Brother Sultan announced that the three of us (Elder Parker, Sister Pinkal, and myself) were leaving, and that Elder Parker and Sister Pinkal would speak, then the choir, then President Imangezeev. I was sitting next to Maksim, and he told me that he thought it was coming… that something wasn’t quite right, and said I should say goodbye to the branch. I got Gosha’s eye contact, and he sneaked up and whispered to Brother Sultan, and I went up to speak after the choir. Left my testimony of the small and simple things, God’s plan for each of us (relationships, where we are, when we are) and how grateful I am that we can each obtain personal testimonies. I was sad, but didn’t cry. :) 


3/2/08
First fast Sunday here in Sokolniki branch. Good meetings with branch presidency and branch council. Olga, the Sisters’ investigator, came to church. The branch is offering help in sharing the gospel (that is, getting involved in lessons w/investigators. President Mikulin is the man… and I’m really excited to go out and get some investigators for the branch to work with. From President, last Sunday, from Elder Bednar, “we don’t have the luxury of being careless about the gospel”


3/3/08
Found some possible investigators from former investigators.


From 2/19/08
3. Every member of our district shared something, thoughts, feelings, testimony of a choice of song, during the Moroni meeting. I remember specifically talking about how glad I am that I’m keeping an everyday journal… even if many of the days end up as one-liners. Elder Vincent commented on how he has looked back, and reading his mission journal, realized how he wished he had written more… especially about his feelings. My feelings right now… I miss the people & work in Kazkahstan, but I’m prepping for some miracles in the not so distant future


We’ve been meeting with people (members) regularly (about daily) since I’ve arrived. Other than that. Now that we’re moved in, our area book has been combed, the street pounding door knocking drudgery can kick in! :) That which has made missionary work inside the MKAD so coveted and enjoyed… of course, that’s how it will be in a transfer or two. Transfer -> trans -> transformational.


3/4/08
First tracting experience in Russia.. And not too shabby. We were contacting for a while today without much of any success. Had talked to Elder Smith and found out a little about his perception towards tracting (really doesn’t like it and neither am I too fond of it). We came to a building which had a few open doors, and at the first we stopped outside and just talked about it.What to say? Should we go in? I asked him “do you want to go in? Because I don’t… but maybe we need to.” We went in the open door and to the top, apt 36 (the building has apartments up to 18, and then 35 and 36 on the top floor (4th).


I told him that I’d take the first door and rung the bell and we waited a little… heard the locks turning, I expected a “Who’s there?!” through the peephole, but the outer door opened revealing a young woman, fairly attractive (as Elder Smith described after leaving the building), 20s with a wedding ring in a tank top. I introduced us to her and asked if we could just come by the next week to share a message about Jesus Christ and happiness. She agreed, and gave us her name and number (Svetlana). It was the only door we tried (basically driven out as her neighbors came walking out and basically forced us down the stairs. Elder Smith’s first success of any sort from tracting… oorah!


3/5/08
Market = Russian ties = new styles!


3/6/08
Second district meeting as a District Leader. Last week was a lesson about planning to meet investigators’ needs and this week was about the area book and the importance of those tools which we are given (daily planners, progress records, area book, etc.)


Things are a lot different here. Contacting basically is not an effective means of finding people to teach, but it is the default as it is the most accessible and requires the least amount of planning or coordination. Talked / argued with one Russian Orthodox man for a good 15-20 minutes today. Elder Smith’s temper came out a little, more or less just a little bite back. People like that guy, it’s like with Alma and Amulek and the lawyers. The questions asked are to catch us on our words “first to accept Christianity? Why don’t you convert America first? Where does your authority come from?” Better to answer as Alma, Amulek, and even the Savior himself answered… looks like I’ve got study material for tomorrow! And didn’t have time yesterday, got an email from Elder Anderson on Wednesday… Vasya, Samat, and Maksim are all going to be baptized in March! (Great work Elder Anderson and Gavrilov!)


3/7/08
Made brownies for our neighbor yesterday and delivered them today. A middle-aged man, Oleg, who asked us how we feel concerning wine. Told him we don’t drink, but it was nice just to make contact with him.


Went to Valdimir’s tonight (Yakruyov) He talked to us about a Jewish center for people of Jewish lineage (free-financed by Israel or something) and about fishing.


3/8/08
Happy international women’s day! And by international, we mean all nations of the former Soviet Union. Met Boris today, he came in contact with the church about 6 years ago and the last real contact he’s had with missionaries was in Ramenskoe, at his dacha. He’s a former engineer (designed airplanes) and he likes mormons and Americans. We made friends with him, and next week, we’re going to talk to him about the church and everything.


Feeling our backs up to the wall now, and it’s time to FIND PEOPLE TO TEACH.


3/9/08
Spoke in church today about mom, in honor of women’s day. I feel as though my Russian ability to speak has tanked since coming back into Russia… so I’ve resolved to humble myself, speak a lot more of it to Elder Smith and at the same time, I’m looking / searching / pondering on how to get the work going in this district and area. It’s quite the paradox, on one end you have the ‘we are served to be faithful, endure well, and fulfill our callings; baptisms regardless’ or “that all comes after the trial of our faith and in the Lord’s time” but then we have apostolic prophecies of entire halls being filled with church members here and pressure and expectations and questions about where the ready people are, how to find them, etc. But then, even people looking for truth still have their agency. Sister Pinkal’s freaking out about it too.


3/10/08
Baked brownies for our neighbors, knocked, heard somebody and after about forever, finally heard ‘Who’s there?’ Explained about being neighbors and such, “We won’t get to know each other, goodbye!” was the reply! Took Natasha shopping (never thought I’d be pushing someone in a wheelchair around Moscow) and talked to my first scientologist on the metro.


Yesterday marked 10 months in the mission field.


3/11/08
Organized our church member book today, watched the remainder of the “Preach My Gospel” training videos in preparations for coming district meetings, contacted a little and ended up with a 30-45 dead time at home. That’s what happens when our days don’t pan out like we should plan them out. A lot of that fault falls on me as the senior companion. I might need to take a little firmer stance on things and how things are run here.


Today Elder Smith and I did share a slightly awkward moment in companionship study. We read ‘ministry’ in the BD and were discussing it, as outlined in the end of Preach My Gospel. When the topic somehow fell upon the paradox about which I wrote yesterday, came to the fact that Elder Smith, in his 22 months of missionary service, has only had 2 investigators ever progress beyond the first lesson (that is, any investigators he has found or begun teaching). Although it might not have been the best time or place to say it, I offered that that might be a result of his own, self-admitted, lack of obedience concerning going to bed on time. He said it’s never been something he’s been good at, even in the MTC. Yeah, there was silence for a good five minutes, then language study, and the tension was gone by then. We’ll see what things may come.


From 2/19/08
4. Had a final, really good, compact lesson with Vasya about repentance in 20-25 minutes before English club on Thursday night. We had picked up Meerkhan from KIMEP and brought him to English Club after our lesson in President Imangezeev’s office, came out, and everyone had arrived for English Club already. 


We had English Club as usual, with Elder Anderson and I teaching the very beginning group. After we finished, we were mingling and then the conversational group, which Elder Parker and Burgess were teaching. I asked Amir (boxing, military, wants to go to Westpoint, Muslim, World of Warcraft) if he heard the news. He said, “yeah” that Elder Parker and Sister Pinkal were going to leave, and then I asked if he heard that I was going as well. “What! Why? You just got here.” Pretty sure if he ever got his hands on President Cranney… “so you’re the one who takes all my friends away!” Wouldn’t be pretty.


So everyone starts talking about us leaving, wanting to know who’s coming in our places, etc. After a while, Maksim decides to make his first gift presentation. He found out Sunday at church that we were leaving, so he brought some books and Kazakh candy. Presented each of us in turn our books (Almaty/KZ tour guide and travel books) and candy. And with each presentation, announcing the number of children we’d have to show these books to. Sister Pinkal, 12, because Mormons have big families, Elder Parker, 16, because he will, and Elder Taylor, 20, that’s all!


“No doubt about it!” I hear Amir say to Ilias as they both crack up laughing.


Then he begins his farewell speech for us. He’s quite the public affairs person, and somehow, after about 3-4 sentences, it turns into a testimony. “The Church of Jesus of Latter days is more than true! There is not a single speck of bad in it.”


And on Thursday night, was all the final goodbyes and pictures and stuff. It was then, that Maksim presented me with my gift from Azamat, who couldn’t come, my “Charles Morgan” miniature boat. Apparently, Azamat gave Maksim the boat, told him to make up some words for the gift presentation, and attribute them to Azamat… but he just told us that and then said his own words. Something along the lines of “This boat, being the boat that Nephi and Lehi sailed across the ocean on. And it is all their labors to be good people, even though Nephi’s brothers, whoever they were, weren’t that way. They separated and became the Nephites and “what do you call them?”... Lamanites! That there may always be Nephites in your life, and that you may never run into Lamanites!”


What a hoot! Not to mention, he pulled me aside and we were looking at pictures on his camera, and he had one friend he wanted to bring and have us start teaching and he expressed at the same time his disappointment that Elder Parker and I wouldn’t be there to do the same thing we did for Maksim. He told just about everybody that night that Elder Parker and Elder Taylor together is like a spiritual atomic bomb!


6. Karligat’s story


Elder Anderson and I come into the Kazakh National Museum of Musical Instruments in Glory Park, and it is already raining again outside. They tell us it’s 100 tenge to get in, but then realized how we’re dressed and looked (we had removed our tags because we were down at the mosque before) and asked if we were foreigners. Yes, ok, then it’s 200 tenge unless you’d like the tour and concert. Would you like that? How much… 100 per person more for guide and 100 more each for concert. We said, alright, and one of the ladies started our tour. Late 30s I’d say, Kazakh lady. We look at the map of KZ and the regional showings of instruments and we then listen to her play the instruments. We finish, and she takes us on the tour. We’re through 1.5 rooms and she asks if we understand Russian… just because we’d been listening to her and not talking to each other while she was giving the tour. She blasted through the first 3 or 4 rooms, giving the well memorized, feelingless museum tour. But about the 4th or 5th room, she started to open up to us. Her husband had died a few years before, she had two daughters (one our age), but her entire demeanor and how she described her life opened to Elder Anderson just how lonely she is. Working in that museum for 10 years… trying to break into a career of musical performance in an orchestra or philharmonic, but for some reason, always returning to her uncle’s rundown, underfunded instrument museum. After finishing the tour, we wandered back into the theater (a theater in the round) and she played a piano number for us. Elder Anderson played a song on the piano, and we really made a connection. We told her a little about the plan of salvation and invited her to church. She agreed to come, but said not to make it known to her co-workers, or they’ll persecute her for it. Upon leaving, I commented to Elder Anderson how eerily that experience was like a movie, and he concurred.


We got a phone call from her later that night (8pm or thereabouts) and she said she needed our help. We were really worried, because too often those kind of phone calls are born of a need for money for an ‘operation’ or to help a daughter w/money or something of that nature.


We went to the museum the next day at noon, and we waited until she finished the tour she was doing. About 1pm, she took us up to her office… and then I understood just how much money she does not have. The office she occupied was the first room on the left of a hall reached by a tight, steep, and unkept staircase, wrapping around one corner. The entirety of the office was no bigger than the room I slept in the night before. Furnished by one coat stand to my left, a large, used, cluttered office desk, two chairs, plus a third with only 1 leg in the corner, behind three piles of newspaper stacked 3 feet high. A dresser whose missing left leg was replaced with a cinder block of uneven height (giving a slant to the dresser), a small nightstand table upon which she placed a cloth for me to sit on, and a slightly warped mirror on the back of the door. This woman, Karligat, was working in poverty and I wouldn’t dream of what living conditions she must be in.


We entered the office and sat as she explained her call for help. Her daughter (of our age) is in Tashkent, and involved with a man, a wealthy man. But a dishonorable and perhaps abusive man. They have expressed some intentions of marrying, and Karligat doesn’t know what to do. She asks us to pray for her daughter, and so Elder Anderson prays. After finishing, Elder Anderson explains that there is something more we can do, as priesthood holders, we can give her a blessing. She accepts, and Elder Anderson pronounces a blessing of comfort and counsel, urging her to express her love to her daughter and to turn to God in prayer for herself and for her daughter. Karligat again promises to be at church Sunday, but also makes mention of introducing us to her daughter. (Nuh-uh sister, no missionary’s going to pair up with your daughter). But whether she came to church that Sunday or not is still not known to me. I would assume not, as in the limited communication between Elder Anderson and I, he has failed to mention it.


3/12/08
First Russian haircut, not bad. First week using gmail again, it’s wonderful. Talked to one of the most racist and hate-oriented guys I’ve ever met today. To him, Islam is not only the disease of the world, but a cancer which can’t be cured, only annihilated and he really hates blacks. He even called after we gave him an invitation and told us to call and come as guests to his home to talk more about it :| I’d forgotten how many crazies the Soviet Union managed to produce.


3/13/08
District meeting, pretty hard core pulled out the lesson on obedience that came to me Sunday afternoon. The McCunes have a HUGE apartment and we had a good lesson about the Godhead with Andrei. Gave his Grandma a blessing of health too.


3/14/08
Card reader! Got Elder Smith to open up more, interesting how different everybody is. Seems as though he’s a little burned out / used up and he’s riding out the end of the mission as he’s served the last months. Talked about his apathy, his point of view (seen practically 0 results from contacting or tracting in the last year) and how that’s been reflected in his lack of talking with people on the street or in the metro. Let’s see if a new approach in the next week can’t shake and bake and change things up a bit.


3/15/08
Met with Boris again, near Natasha’s place. Talked about religion this time and started on his progress. Might require some time. Found 8 ruble bread! Pronounced a blessing on Valdimir Ilichyov (suffered a stroke about a year ago) as we’re beginning to prepare him to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood. Oh, and bought a 3 month metro pass :( $$$$


3/16/08
On Tuesday, we’ll meet with Vladimir, a fellow who was baptized here in Moscow, moved to Novosibirsk, there for some reason was kicked out of the church, and has come back to Moscow seeking to be restored to membership. Under President Mikulin’s direction, we’ll be meeting with him. We’ll see what comes of it!


Did the sacrament for Natasha (wheelchair / bedridden, English speaking lady), like usual. Zone conference tomorrow!


3/17/08
Really really good zone conference today with President Gibbons of the Area Presidency. All about working with members and his prescription (he’s a former physician) for missionary work in our mission (and Russia). See front of my Preach My Gospel. Good FHE with Chizhovka family. 4 girls, one trying to prepare for baptism, and so we tried to help her understand. Something I’ll have to learn as I become a father, teaching an 8 year old about baptism! (more ways than words)


3/18/08
Meeting with Vladimir (excommunicated in Novisibirsk) who has come back to Moscow (he was baptized here) to be reinstated… or to try to be. I’m just glad it’s not my call as far as reinstatement goes.


A really good picture would be Sergei Botezat holding Varavara (his daughter) as they pray. She is the cutest little girl!


3/19/08
Meeting with Valdimir Yakrushyov (removed his name and his family from the church 10-13 years ago over a mishap / offense with a priesthood leader in preparation for the temple) and had a good discussion. Revealing in that he has drifted in his understanding and beliefs to an attempted grasp/belief in reincarnation. Without the anchor of a testimony in gospel principles (especially in the restoration), his search for knowledge and understanding has been fueled by doctrines interpreted by his own mortal logic. Actually felt like a useful meeting for him and us!


We also got a ‘moving-in’ cake from our new landlandy! Yay for free food!


3/20/08
District meeting & brainstorming
Hours of contacting
Aleksander, Ricky, and Sergei (stay tuned)


3/21/08
Split with Elder Earl. Yesterday’s stories real quick.


Ricky came onto the metro and sat on the bench opposite of me. He’s definitely not Russian, we make eye contact a few times… I sheepishly awaited the next stop… and the next stop… and finally kicked myself out of my seat and sat by him. He’s Ricky, from India, and he works at the Cherkovsky market, selling pens, notebooks, school supplies. Talked a little in English, invited him to church.


On the ride back, ran into Aleksander. First asked ‘could I talk with you?’
‘What about?’
‘About anything, you see, I came here not long ago and I need to practice my Russian’
‘But, what about specifically? Suggest something…’
‘Well, I’m here as a missionary, so we could talk about God and religion, if it interests you. If not, no worries, about anything else would be fine’
‘I’ve never heard or seen anything like that (pointing to my tag), which denomination?’
‘We’re Christians, obviously by the “Church of Jesus Christ’, but many people call us ‘Mormons’
‘Ah! I understand, it’s a nickname, Mormons’
‘And what have you heard about Mormons? About us?’
‘Polygamy’
‘But, that’s actually not correct. I have one mother, my father has one wife. We don’t have polygamy.’
‘Oh’
‘And what denomination are you? What do you believe in?’
‘Something about a higher power’
‘And, I’m interested, what do you reckon will happen after death?’
A little bit of pain, and then, darkness, forever.
‘Really? That’s sad’
There, we had to switch metro cars. Found his name, and then went into another train/wagon. After a few seconds, I leaned over and said ‘Aleksander, before birth, we lived with God as spirits. And after death, we will return to him and we can live happily, forever.’
‘That would be great’ he responded
‘And if it is true, would you be interested in knowing how?’
‘Yeah’
And I gave him an invitation right at his stop.


3/22/08
Exactly one month has passed since my return to Russia. Finished split with Elder Earl today. Met their neighbor (Prospect Mira) who teaches English, really great guy. Met with church member Pavel, a lot of teaching opportunities and I hope that I’ve helped Elder Earl in some way to become a better missionary.


3/23/08
Some days just make you feel, or at least the events of some days, lead to the feeling that you aren’t accomplishing much of anything. Sunday nights tend to be some of those times (statistics reporting) and it’s been even more apparent as of late. Home teaching with Igor Chuzhovka to the Suslovy. He gets really nervous in those home teaching lessons.


More branch activity planned by missionary problems… happens here like in Almaty (but throw an insensitive, lively, but slightly offensive branch mission coordinator into the mix!)


3/24/08
Lots of conflicting ( or maybe churning is a better word… unsettling at least) emotions, concerns, feelings of inadequacies, stresses, opinions & beliefs are all building up inside and between missionaries and branch members / leaders.


How the passage of time, change in events and simple decisions can lead to despair, joy, discomfort, satisfaction, to anything! Only Thursday night I wasn’t floating in happiness, but felt fairly satisfied and justified in going to bed happy.


And now, I turn to this pen and paper as an outlet of frustration, to a certain extent, but more so as a release of a lot of concern and sense of underachievement already this transfer with Elder Smith in the 11th hour, as next Saturday (after this Saturday) brings a new transfer… and as I look back we have managed to accomplish very little in our already 4 weeks of service together. As his mission approaches fulfillment, fully aware of it he has pulled the e-brake (in his own words, his exit is coming up, he needs to slow down to come off the highway safely and admits to not really wanting to work (especially finding people). But at the same time, as senior companion a lot of weight falls on me… and even more so as district leader. I feel some of the weight of Elder Earl and Elder Miller’s lack of success and the weight of Sister Pinkle and Sister Kayookova’s despair in not finding investigators or people to teach. Have they no training for district leaders? How am I to motivate an openly and shamelessly burned out junio companion, with 8 weeks of his mission remaining? How are we to find people to teach in perhaps the least openly religious city in the world? How can we break the barrier between the everchanging faces of our branch’s 8 missionaries and the membership? When will I ever find time to finish recording the events of my last week in Almaty?


3/25/08
Took Natasha for a walk today… wow; that takes forever. Companion got really excited about replanting our plant. Ho hum kinda day. A lot of talking, not enough working. 


But really, I did do something awesome in serving someone, in all reality, I forgot :( Pushed an invalid around Moscow in a wheelchair!


3/26/08
Red square, Temple of Christ the Savior, meet the Fadeyevy!


3/27/08
Bread pudding, taught Dima Timurshin how to home teach and Robert Tumanyan how to pray.


3/28/08
Traffic jam, a walk through a Soviet nature escape (Izmailovsky park), planning… setting the tone for a Luke 5:9-10 transfer and Arut standing us up. Another theatrical bug has me itching to write some poetry, but time doesn’t quite agree with the pen nor thoughts at the moment.


3/29/08
The dreaded day has come, branch activity! “Day of Spring”


Anyway, back to Thursday (3/27/08). We set up a meeting to go home teaching to the Tumanyan family, a single sister with two children, Ernest (4) and Robert (10), who lives with her non-member parents. Emma, the sister, works 2 jobs, so she hasn’t been to church in a long time, but Robert was there last Sunday (because Dima Timurshin brought him). We came to home teach (and help Dima learn how to home teach), but Emma was still at work, so we taught Robert a little lesson about what it means to home teach and had a little question & answer (about things he heard in primary, like who’s in charge, God or Jesus? What/who is the Holy Ghost? Why did Satan get kicked out of heaven? How do you pray? Why did Abinadi go to King Noah if he didnt’ believe? Etc.


And how sweet a little experience it was to have Dima, of his own desire, answering many of those questions. Keep in mind that Dima was only just baptized in June 2007, not quite a year ago, and especially as we taught Robert the format of prayer and he offered his first prayer. With the understanding that it really was his own prayer and not just copying the words he’s heard from others in prayers.


The activity came, we lived through it (can you say… planning an activity… during the activity!) and now we are robbed an hour of sleep (Russian daylight savings). I’m off to bed!


3/30/08
Church… Elder Kulikovsky gave me some pronunciation advice today. I just have to drop the fear of speaking bad Russian and go at it. 3 hour home teaching with Sasha and Marina Sterligov. They’re awesome, and we’ll probably need to cut it a little shorter next time :| 


3/31/08
Split with Elder Miller, April fool’s transfer tomorrow!


4/1/08
First meeting with Arut. He checked us out and apparently liked what he found.


Elder Smith got a nice April Fool’s slap to the face today as Elder Flake (Zone leader) called and informed us that he needed to pack his bags tomorrow. He’s confused, and it will probably lead to some spite against President Cranney. But hopefully something in the next few days can put him on a better direction to end his mission than the line he’s sticking to right now.


4/2/08
Way too late


4/3/08
District meeting today - what is a successful missionary & accountability. President Cranney called today to give me a heads up on the fact that tomorrow I’ll start 
TRAINING
Sister Pinkal and Kayookova bought some treats for district meeting (for my b-day) and then Elder Smith said his goodbye to Natasha. Tomorrow morning’s study will be a lot of pondering and planning as life is about to get a lot more interesting!


4/4/08 - Sokolniki: Mooradyan
Elder Mooradyan is my new companion, he’s from Armenia, and I’m really excited to be serving and training him. He’s super humble, and I can see the kind of faith he has and it’s very refreshing.


Really good meeting with Valdimir Yakushyov. He said he’ll come to church on Sunday… and he gave me an old Russian rouble for my birthday! Really looking forward to an especially full transfer. We can only communicate in broken Russian (on both sides) and he has to study Russian through English (e.g. he looks up an Armenian word in an Armenian-English dictionary, then that English word in an English-Russian dictionary) He’s about the complete opposite of what any trainer doesn’t want, and I’m grateful to the Lord and to President Cranney for the opportunity and trust and honor to not only serve with him, but to train him.


4/5/08
Happy birthday to me, happy birthday to me, happy birthday to me, happy birthday to me.


Wow am I tired. Meeting with Boris today. Interesting opening prayer he said for us… just started talking with eyes open, then answered the phone in the middle of it, then went right back. He’s weird, and I just can’t quite grasp what he needs.


Elder Mooradanyan is about as meek, probably timid too, as they come. Talked to his first person today! Sleep time.


4/6/08
Interesting fast and testimony meeting today. Sister Ilichyova ripped into the brethren of the branch a little because her husband is at sea and her home teachers don’t come… then Sister Fadeyeva went up and kind of went against it… amusing, though a little uncomfortable. Elder Moordanyan is scared out of his mind to talk to people on the streets, but it’s only his 3rd day!


4/7/08
Bad health from companion, meeting Vladimir in metro (and getting a ‘life is a school’ lecture at his house) and getting locked out of our apartment. See what adventures tomorrow brings.


4/8/08
Good article concerning journal writing in this month’s Ensign. Did a little correction on my journal keeping habits… although time is an understandable issue concerning my lack of depth in writing, a few things I better make mention of… as of right now, Dad is unemployed, looking around for what he wants to do after being let go with Washington Group being bought. No worries, received a severance package and he has offers and positions available. He just wants to take some thoughtful time, pray, and study before making a decision.


I’m serving with Elder Mooradyan, and it’s quite the change from a trunky American missionary to a greenie Armenian missionary. Apparently he has been dealing with health issues since the MTC (dizziness, trouble breathing, he described it like a pencil poking his heart with every breath, and soreness). The doctors there didn’t find anything wrong, prescribed medication. But he says it hasn’t helped. He’s also dealing with a little bit of reality, that serving in the world’s most expensive city, with the least friendly inhabitants. Armenia missionaries are approached by people on the streets. He served a mini-mission there (3 weeks) and he just kind of expected things to be the same here. So I’m trying to bring up his spirits. We speak in Russian together, which is difficult because neither of us are particularly strong in the language, but we get by.


Interesting finish to an otherwise uneventful day. We were contacting, had a scheduled street meeting fall through, prayed for a little more direction, and as we were walking past an older man I asked ‘How are you?’ He proceeded to explain how he had lived through 4 years of war, he was 71, ‘how old am I? Guess!’ and asked what interest is it to us. When he got around to reading our tags, he decided we were Anti-Christs, explained rather loudly why he believed more than we could ever believe, started talking about his ‘right’ as a Russian citizen to know what we’re doing in Russia (he thought I was Baltic) and promptly called the police on his cell phone. I started to walk away, he grabbed my arm. I called the APs and Elder Briggs answered


 ‘Can you get away from him?’  
‘Yes’
‘Then run’


And so I broke his grip and Elder Mooradyan and I took off. Seems a few days ago a large (60-70 ppl) group of FLDS members were arrested in some polygamist ranch scandal and every Russian news station is reporting it as though was our church, even using the official church name. Creating some very bad publicity for the church.


On a completely different topic: feeling like I have some trust I’ve been entitled with… which I’m not quite living up to. Perhaps, that the temptation to coast as just another district leader, with maybe different district meetings, or something of that sort. Brandon’s email today was very unexpected, but very welcome. He tapped into the pipe that this opportunity as a trainer and district leader is just the beginning. That the Lord has more in store for me as a missionary in Russia Moscow. That my responsibilities won’t be lessening, and in fact, they will increase. But my personal capabilities to deal with and make the best of things will also improve with the Lord’s help. Time to stop wussing out, waiting on the Lord’s timing, and simply talking about things. Time to act! Like, President Monson’s first presidency message in this month’s Ensign about learning from the past, preparing for the future, and living in the present. Too often I find myself preparing for the present and living in whatever happens to come, and then trying to not take responsibility. I have the gifts necessary to do what I need to, so why do I flounder in self-handicapping? Or contentment with a standard lower than I’m capable of… see Luke 19, parable of the talents… which am I? I know I’m capable of the 1st, why am I playing to the level of other missionaries? When I should do what the Lord has blessed me with the capability to do?


4/10/08
First all-Russian district meeting today. I think it will be good for me, and force me to more clearly teach. Worked on a letter to send out to homes / apartments as a means of establishing better first contact with people. It’s Elder McCune’s idea, and he’s got our whole district working on it.


Still learning and trying to communicate with Elder Mooradyan. Still a lot to learn and teach.


4/11/08
Took Natasha for a walk today. Good, long planning session today… but we’re getting better at communicating. The only problem is that it’s just not coming as fast or as easy as either would like it to be. He put cookies in the fridge, because I put bread in the freezer :) He told me an Armenian joke… 3 day old Borscht


4/12/08
General Conference like never before, half Armenian meeting, more tomorrow!


4/13/08
So, Wednesday I received an email from dad, talking about conference. He expressed his deep appreciation and love for the words, examples, and love of the leaders of our church. He especially commented on the priesthood session, noting that I should not miss it, for there was something to happen, a “once-in-a-life-time experience” as he put it, which would not show up in the conference edition Ensign / Liahona. I had already decided, as senior companion and DL that my companion and I were to miss the priesthood session (it was all on re-broadcast, a week after conference really took place) in order to man our English club, so the other elders in our district could participate. This new information from dad rekindled the issue in my mind and heart, and for hours I was torn in what decision to make. It would be President Monson’s first priesthood session as prophet, and I thought maybe some special ceremony or something with regards to the solemn assembly held earlier that morning to sustain the new First Presidency. I wanted so much to participate, but to cancel English club and go back on my word to these potential investigators? I spoke with the senior couple in our district and with our district and we came to the conclusion that we would ask the sisters from a neighboring branch to substitute as we brethren attended the broadcast.


Imagine my excitement and anticipation as the priesthood session began, and I patiently and attentively took notes, listened to the talks and spirit, waiting for the moment. Then it came, During President Monson’s talk, he shared a story about being at a stake conference years ago and noticing a little boy in the front row, copying his actions. Folding his arms the same way, crossing his legs in the same direction… so President Monson decided to beat him, he made eye contact, and wiggled his ears. There at the podium in front of the largest gathered body of priesthood in history, President Monson wiggled his ears. I laughed, and it took a few minutes to realize all the stress that one silly moment had been for, and that it is the same way in our lives. So much we worry about things, that we fail to see the big picture and remember what is really important. 


4/13/08
More conference, companion in the physical dumps, the ZL’s giving us the works (stats, changing the stats w/o any help).


4/14/08
Getting the doctor’s orders. Contacting isn’t effective. Cancelled FHE.


4/15/08
The looming day has come, in which the persistent illness of my companion and his physical stamina have met and he laith in bed, counting the minutes… awaiting the relief of medications and rest. He dealt with it, or lived through it I guess, in the MTC as well. Dizziness, a pain in the chest… like a pen poking his heart as he described it, & trouble breathing. Now, throw on top of that he is of the mindset that this is a trial (only came in the MTC, never experienced it earlier) and just need to endure to the end! (making himself a martyr). I want to show him that a mission isn’t meant to be a tribulation, and not a walk in the park either, but your two years of full dedication to the Lord should not be highlighted by trial and misery, which you lived through… but by the shining moments (hymn, ‘Live the Shining moments’)


Birthday packages!


4/16/08
Remembering ward picnics (and renting out the pool at the Natatorium) and how we would have games, fun, and go to the pool, and I always avoided those who were inactive, not my friends, etc. I saw activity as a reward for us ‘worthy’ members who came to church, paid tithing, etc. It wasn’t until later that I realized the true purpose in our activities, programs, etc. It’s because we’re reaching out, not pushing up.


Today was a hard day, I won’t lie.


4/17/08
Zone conference about unity… something we’re striving for!


4/18/08
Weekly planning, Natasha’s, and made a little break through in communication. Hoping and praying things will get better. He’s still sick.


4/19/08
Finally well enough to work the whole day. Contacted, English club, more contacting. Elder Mooradyan is having the symptoms still though, and add onto that, he’s only getting 3 hours of sleep at night and trouble breathing. We’re going to the SOS clinic tomorrow, they’ve got an Armenian doctor!


4/20/08
First real branch mission coordination meeting in this branch, since I’ve been here. At the SOS clinic, got Elder Mooradyan some meds to help with sleep. Should help with stress and anxiety. Already a little better tonight.


4/21/08
Happy Anniversary Mom and Dad! 29th… I think. Met with Chizhovka family for FHE. Another friendly warning against become one of the many long-time member families with fail to maintain or build friendships and relationships outside of the church.


4/22/08
John 15:2 O how I feel like unto the branch that beareth fruit and the Lord “purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit”


A few funny occasions that should be recorded:
* Elder Mooradyan, seeing me put bread in the freezer, put his cookies in the fridge. When I asked why a few days later, “I don’t know, I saw you put bread in there… so I thought…”
* Today, he tried to warm up a frozen slice of bread in the microwave, burnt it on the microwave plate! It turned into black goop, it was pretty gross, but very funny too. 


It’s hard, because as far as living alone, this is Elder Mooradyan’s first time away from home. So is he dealing with a few issues:
1. companion who doesn’t speak Armenian (we aren’t the best at communicating right now)
2. Missionary schedule (long days, lots of walking)
3. Russian people (he expected missionary work to be what it is in Armenia. A baptism every week, people approaching the missionaries on the streets, baptismal commitments at the end of every first lesson, meeting with investigators 2-3 times every week, no contacting or tracting. Friend, he’s here in a land that is a lot less trusting, and a little less ready.
4. Culture shock, but also that he’s away from family and under a lot of pressure to succeed. I’m not sure how to alleviate that stress, because he’s really not open to talking with me. Especially because we don’t speak the same native language. He really wants someone he can open up to in his own language.


He’s tried a few medications over the past week, trying to reduce the pain in his chest, and then to help him sleep. Right now he’s only getting 3-4 horus a night. They don’t seem to be working though. I really want to help him, but he’s one of those kind who tend to play the victim, or martyr, when really it isn’t necessary. Or even when it’s better not to. I pray for him and for help in knowing what to do. I just hope things will get better for him, rather sooner than later.


4/23/08
Really at a loss right now. I don’t have any idea of what I can/could/should do to help things get better. All I can do is turn to the Lord and turn to the scriptures… then act on whatever comes.


4/24/08
Healthy! Things are looking up… a few bumps crying over an alcoholic roulet and mission hardships, some DL overwhelm… but things look to be improving (health has a big deal with it)


4/25/08
Emotional roller coaster, that’s for sure. Weekly planning (tried to do it), trying to earn Elder Mooradyan’s trust. Helping Natasha, he actually wanted to work today!


4/26/08
English club, random English speaking lady asked for an invitation to our church on the street. Easter midnight mass, in all reality, fairly boring. Women cover their heads with shawls, most people are holding their forgiveness candles and whole lot of crossing, bowing, and ‘Christ is Risen! Truly Risen’ In Sister Pinkal’s magical terms “Shoot me”


4/27/08
Moldovian Dima came to church. “Almost” fainting companion. Easter.


4/28/08
More companion sicknesses. Found out a few more pieces to his puzzle. (family doctor and advice before the mission, what the SOS Armenian doctor said). Really not exactly sure what I’m doing wrong, or what I should be doing to make things better.


4/29/08
He only got 3 hours of sleep last night, only took a half a pill. But today was a lot better day. Gave some of his ideas (as a member of the institute presidency) to the senior CES couple (Gregorys) and visited Vladimir Ilichyov in the hospital and a little bit of contacting.


Got a Mutumbo finger wag at English club today as well.


4/30/08
A little clarification for the sake of everything that has been happening with regards to my companion this transfer. About the end of my first week with Elder Mooradyan, his health started acting up. He started complaining of pain in his heart (like a pen poking it, as he described it), dizziness and overall lack of energy. We waited about 3-4 days, expecting he’d get over it. But come to find out that he was experiencing the same symptoms in the MTC for a while, but was given a blessing and the problems left. We consulted Dr. McCune, who prescribed an acid reducing medication (the heart pain is most likely a case of heartburn, caused by acid imbalance in the stomach). The first medication didn’t work, we went to the SOS international clinic to get him checked out by an Armenian doctor there. No problems with the heart, and the doctor prescribed a sedative to help him sleep at night and hopefully reduce stress. Didn’t help, so got another, stronger medicine to help him sleep. But either turns out that anything less than a full tablet doesn’t help him sleep at all, and a full tablet brings on side effects that are basically worse the next day (complete exhaustion and constant dizziness).


And the biggest catch is how he’s ‘dealing’ with it. He already feels bad enough not knowing how to approach people or talk to complete strangers on the street about our message. He imagined that it would be like Armenia, where you can ask a person for directions and you’ll end up with an appointment (How do you know Armenian? Where are you from? Why are you here? We’re the first Christian country! You should tell us more about your church). Not so in a country where the last thing people want is to be involved with others outside of family & friends, especially people in white shirts and name tags. 


He’s also dealing with the fact that I can’t work with all my heart, might, mind and strength with his health like this. And so, he gets more down on himself, but won’t open up for help. He won’t try any more medicine for heartburn, unless it specifically says ‘for the heart’, as he doesn’t trust Dr. McCune’s prescription for heartburn. 


Seems a bit like the man praying on his roof during a flood. 3 boats come by and offer to help him. “No,” he says, “God will save me.” He eventually dies, asks God ‘why didn’t you save me?’, to which God replies, ‘I sent 3 boats, what else did you want?’


Today went to the armory at the Kremlin and also walked around the Kremlin. Apparently, they have the world’s largest bell.


5/1/08
Interviews with President Cranney. Feels really good to get some of these burdens off. Just talking about the situation with Elder Mooradyan. REally good, controlled, focused district meeting. Feels like we’re gaining some trust here and working on things going up and onward!


5/2/08
What a nice emotional roller coaster this all comes out to be. Elder Mooradyan woke up still under the affects of his sleep medication, really had a bad morning. We took Natasha for a walk and got an earful of free medical advice from our branch invalid doctor :D 


Came home, ate, weekly planning with an extra long companionship inventory. Finally opened Elder Mooradyan up a little more. Growing up he was very close to his mom, having had his trust broken by several people, he’s not been open to anyone else really after. But after 3-4 weeks of pleading, came to a breakthrough today.


His mission, as he has come to understand it, is a trial for him to gain more faith and spiritual strength, in preparation for the army. It’s mandatory conscription in Armenia, he even needs to be back in Armenia in October 2009 in order to be within the law, so his mission is only 18 months. President Cranney let me know that. So, it turns out that his constant pressure of being away from home for the first time, away from his mom for the first time, culture and language shock, and his own fragility, is all magnified by this looming military service a year and a half away. And every day, he’s living trying to prepare for that. We’ve got to get his mind on the work, on the people, and not on himself.


5/3/08
Yesterday, we also had an interesting question pop up (more like, I was inspired to ask), when I asked Elder Mooradyan what he thought about me… his answers:
* American
* Big family
* Cooks well


5/4/08
Yesterday was Elder Moordyan’s first experience in exercising the priesthood as a missionary. Liana, Nadya, and Elmira, 3 young women (20-25) who live in our area, called and asked for blessings. We came, although, at the very moment they called, Elder Mooradyan was laying in bed ‘without the strength to get up’


He anointed, seeing as he hadn’t ever sealed a blessing before, and I was voice for all three of the blessings. There was a lot of strength in the witness of the Holy Ghost brought to each of us participating… and I can almost being to sympathize with traveling patriarch Gary Browning. He’ll give 5 patriarchal blessings in one day, to complete strangers! Although those 3 blessings on health weren’t the same kind of blessing, it was still draining. But then I was uplifted by strength that was not from my own personal stores.


Today, more pieces ot the Mooradyan puzzle were found, but not yet placed. He told me of his dream, which he sees as a prophecy / warning / confirmation of what his family doctor said before the mission, and what the SOS doctor said. 


To him, there seems to be one of two choices:
1. Stay and sacrifice yourself (your health, happiness) to bless others here and your family back at home
2. Leave and serve at home in Armenia, on mini-missions, in your calling, and don’t sacrifice your well-being


It’s a pretty deep question, and with the number of exceptions / examples / verses that can apply (DC 122:9, DC132:50, two conflicting as the interpretations of Elder Mooradyan make it out to be).


5/5/08
Called President Cranney, DC 46:27, dream was not from God. I remember President Cranney declaring ‘I have the keys for interpretation of dreams, and that is not from God.’ We’re on a split, I’m with Elder Briggs, and it’s a whole nother world.


5/6/08
Finished the split, but no before President Cranney managed to call and shake things up a bit. Elder Mooradyan is being transferred this Saturday to Zelenigrad to be in a threesome and work with the Armenian branch mission coordination, Arman. Elder Price (another greenie, whose trainer, Elder Cooper, is ending his mission a week early to show his parents around) is going to be my companion, at least for 1 week. Find out more in the next 2 days.


Sergey Botezat is a really good cook, Tsigankov family is nice, pleasant members who could use a little fire and encouragement. Almost got run over by a runaway scooter and met a 20 year old fencer from Azerbaijan.


5/7/08
Half a p-day, kind of. Wrote home and bought groceries in light of the fact that Friday all of everything will be closed for Victory Day. Tried my hand at borscht and banana lemon bread (‘Danger Will Robinson” as Elder Foote put it) and found out about a few interesting and enlightening things. Sister Pinkal’s warning to Elder Miller and his increasing # of phone calls (of which I was unaware), ‘two words Elder Miller, Woodward and Zhernikova, avoid the appearance of evil’ and the fact that Sister Gorina gets offended when we speak to each other in English. She’s seeming to be a little like Elder Parker’s personality, knowing what’s going on at all times. But who’d of known she of all people would be offended by it… well, live, learn, and adapt accordingly!


5/8/08
Evening before one year mark. District meeting about the Book of Mormon. Really feeling Elder Mooradyan’s despari, you could say, and what effect that has on his desire to work. A lot of lengthy prayers without the living faith to fulfill them. Poor health playing the whipping boy.


5/9/08
So a year has come and gone, so has the final chapter of my first training saga. Today was Victory Day, so we were in normal clothes without name tags, watching the parade of tanks, jet-fighter fly overs, etc. We walked around the monuments, taking more pictures in a single day than I’ve ever taken in any other single day of my life. Sister Gorina somehow enjoys taking unquantified amounts of ‘district’ photos, statue photos, posed photos, flower photos, tree photos, etc.


And accordingly, today marked the anti-climactic finale of the dysfunctional companionship under my stewardship. There are days to be required in the gleaning from the past 5 weeks, and the harvest should be fine, yet humbling in the working thereof.


5/10/08 - Sokolniki: Colby Price
New companion, Elder Price from Riverton, UT. This is gonna be good!


5/11/08
Fast Sunday, Sister Gorina and Elder Miller. Nikolai talked to him after church, he came half way through. Really good guy and ‘what you think about Moscow?’ “It’s not home, but if I hadn’t come, I wouldn’t have found out about this church.” Sacrament to Natasha’s, old deaf guy letting us in tracting (my family is all on the dacha!) and talked with the family (Mother’s day).


5/12/08
Sweet, real companionship study again!


ON a split with Elders Smith and Flake (Zone leaders, and international branch elders). Elder Smith is with me in our area. Looking to be a really good day already, found service for the next few weeks. We went to one hospital, a children’s hospital, and spoke with the head security guy, who spoke with the head doctor, and they said they needed no help so we moved on to the next hospital. There, we were referred to the head doctor right away. But the ‘entry’ to his office, we explained to one doctor (she asked what we wanted) that we were volunteer missionaries offering our services. She rather vehemently declined, ‘we have our own faith here, God in each of us, etc.” and I frankly stated, ‘we can do manual labor, paint, or fix fences, or clean up around the place’. She started laughing, ‘paint! You can paint!’, then walking into the head doctor’s offic announced, ‘we have here some volunteers who want to paint! Come in, come in… pretty sure she was just mocking us and the verse Ether 12:26 might accurately describe my feeling to what she was saying… but we went in and after 5 minutes had agreed on Tuesday afternoons, 1-3pm, we would paint the side fences of the hospital property!


Then we picked up two contacts (one an opportunity to teach a whole family, a man named Tony from Congo, his wife, and daughter, and the other an atheist bachelor who places Buddhism as the closest religion to truth… but even then, not completely. Bought some good lozhki (shoe horns / spoons) and hit 15 of our 20 invitations goal. Managed to whip up a nice noodles & sauce dish with an egg and mushroom sauce.


A meeting with Valdimir Yakushyov yet to come, who knows what the coming days will bring as we start running in the mornings.


5/13/08
Good day’s work. Member meeting with Valdimir Ilichyov. There’s something in the air…


5/14/08
Found more service, met daily goals, culture night with the world folk dancing… pretty sweet.


5/15/08
District meeting with President Mikulin, discussing how we can help the branch. Carrying Sister Shaveko’s luggage (literally on our backs) from office to central building. End of the actual transfer, new faces in the district tomorrow!


5/16/08
Elder Kulikovski is Elder Foot’s new companion, and Sister Graf is Sister Pinka’s companion. New issues and strengths in our district, that’s for sure!


5/17/08
Baptism for Lera Chizhovka and Misha Gavrilov. English club, talked to Dima who has taken all the lessons, come to church many times in the past. Went with him to Tretakovsky Gallery (free ‘night at the museum’). Crazy, Elder Price is not the art gallery type!


5/18/08
Crazy day at Church. What it really should be like for missionaries, too busy to get everything done! Good week ahead. Slava (narrow field of vision), Sasha (Sergey Kazachinski’s friend) at church and so forth.


5/19/08
Service in clinic moving furniture. Tired, peace out.


5/20/08
Tracting, let in by some Word of Life ladies. Per Elder Price, ‘she looked like she wanted to get to know two little American boys.’


5/21/08
Bath, way too late


5/23/08
Wednesday night we had to see Elder Kulikovski off at the train station at 11:20pm, for his visa trip, so that left us up late and in a threesome with Elder Foote yesterday. Some good metro contacting, running home from the metro in a downpour and contacting in a threesome. First lesson with Boris. He claims to be a scientific atheist, although he accepts the teachings in a book his neighbor wrote called ‘the teachings of life’. The book seems to be an intellectual’s attempt to justify Buddhism ideals from a scientific perspective. Although he does not practice any religion, he is very open and accepted the Book of Mormon with pleasure and promised to read and pray. A very kind man, bachelor of about 50 years, and he even offered the spare room in his 3 room apartment for us to live in! He also wants us to translate and publish ‘the teachings of life’ into ‘American’, but thankfully that isn’t a very strong desire on his part.


Went to pick up Elder Kulikovski at 6:30 am this morning. Dang, missed running 2 days in a row.


5/24/08
Sweet meeting with Yuri and sweet text from him, I’ll write it tomorrow.


5/25/08
Awesome day, lots tomorrow to write.


5/26/08
Started out the day with our meeting with the branch presidency before church. Good meeting, reporting on what we had done in the branch and such.


Vladimir Yakushyov (fisherman and former church member) arrived early. We woke him up by calling at 7:30 am and he showed up at 9am. Later, around 9:30am, just before Yuri showed up, I sat with Vladimir and Elder price with Yuri. Then, a man from the day before (we talked with him on the street and he told us that we don’t have a chance here in Russia… too much Orthodox influence and because all who come to our church just want something material from Americans) came in and sat with Elder Foote. But luckily Elder Kulikovsky talked to him and got him a copy of the Book of Mormon.


Our gospel principles lesson was on baptism, and priesthood lesson about President Hinckley’s talk ‘Slow to Anger.’ Yuri liked it and Vladimir as well. Vladimir really thanked me for calling and getting him to come.


Found out from Elder Price some cool stuff about Yuri. Saturday night, after our meeting with Yuri, we were in the metro. “Price, thank you for talking! I’ve been greatly impressed. And say my thanks to Taylor! See you tomorrow!’ He told Elder Price, at church, that he read the chapter we gave him, 3 Nephi 11, and prayed about it and watched ‘Mr and Mrs. Smith’, the Brad Pitt and Angelina Joe Lee movie, then had a dream about his family. The best dream he’s ever had. He wants to see a baptism and he wants us to call him today!


After church, we did sacrament at Natasha’s, ate sick nasty rife with ‘beef’ (canned greasy stuff) and went home teaching to Sasha and Marina Sterligov with Dima Timurshin. Had to book it out of there to make our 7pm at Boris’s house, the ‘atheist’ << forget to mention, although it’s May 25th, it’s freezing and raining and we are in suit coats and didn’t bring umbrellas>> We get to Boris’s about 15 minutes late, and then his apartment call button doesn’t work, so we call his cell, he comes down to let us in. We go up and he shows us around his place, we sit down… he still hasn’t read any of the Book of Mormon. Started to show us his ‘teachings of life’ book again. Elder Price asked him what he thinks about God, without the book. He’s kind of agnostic (a higher power) but he’s not really sure what to believe, what he wants to believe, and what he really believes. Played a record of Russian Orthodox chants / music from the 17th century and gave us the record, along with another record of chiming bells. He has practically no faith, but whether out of desperation, curiosity, or desire, he seems willing to give things a try.


We got out 6 min to 9pm, leavingus w/36 min to reach our goal of 140 invitations on the week (we had 13 left to get it). We talked to a group of 6 schoolkids and even at the end of the night, I walked down a babushka (she declined, so we talked to the next young couple we saw). But the most interesting thing was the young man we approached around the metro. We asked about English club and he just started talking to us, “Why did you come to me specifically, why not that girl standing over there, why me? See, because not just 5 minutes ago, I broke up with my girlfriend. I really loved her…” He told us the story how she left him for someone else, they had been in a nearby bar and she left with another man, and he was left to leave and started smoking. He was finishing his 2nd cigarette when we approached, and he was up to 5 when we walked away. But it was a scene from a Dostoevsky novel. I felt like I was talking to Raskolnikov. A bum approached us, begging for money. He gave 10, I gave 10, and the man stumbled down the steps into the metro. He wondered aloud ‘it makes you think, what happened in his life, which lead him to this. What’s his story? What kind of life has he had, and how does he live now? All day, wandering, drunk?’


He further talked to us, studied English 7 years ago, he almost went into the FSB (Russian equivalent of the FBI).


Two bums, a man and a woman, approached us ‘Is school out already?’ ‘Yeah!’ we passed all of our exams and we’re done till the fall’ he answered for the 3 of us.


She began begging for money, but stopped at the sight of our nametags, crossed herself, and started crying out how we weren’t going to force her in anything, or into believing anything. He replied ‘they’re not going to force anything on you, they’re not forcing anything on me.’ We explained that we already gave money not 5 minutes before, and she and the man rumbled down the steps. He again began ‘just look, they leave with a difference in how they walk, they’re smiling and a little more life to them, although they’re probably drunk. But because we talked to them like they’re normal people, because they are people.’ We left Raskolnikov with our English invitation and a church invitation with our cell #, but I’m pretty sure last night what he needed was just someone to listen.


5/27/08
Meeting with Andrei, yesterday, meeting with Yuri


5/28/08
P-day, Boris, some nasty compote (cherry, 5 years old, I was a freshman in high school when he made it). Had to go back to the apartment to floss and brush our teeth, definitely probably fermented.


5/29/08
Zone conference about standing blameless before God and revelation and stuff. Meeting with Yuri, restoration video and more. 


5/30/08
Vladimir break up, ball, planning


5/31/08
Elder Price and I are sitting in the Europe East Area office, 14th floor of Meridian center / crossroads tower as patriarch Gary Browning is giving Patriarchal blessings. Very much like when we hosted him in Kazakhstan.


So from 8:50am this Saturday morning until 5:30pm we were secretaries, ushering people in and such. Lots of time for study, writing letters.


6/2/08
P-day Monday. Graveyard of fallen monuments, inside the Temple of Christ the Savior. Contacting!


6/3/08
Vladimir Ilichyov, haircuts (Elder Price in newspaper loincloth / kilt. Contacting.


6/4/08
Elder Price is a baby, lost Vladimir, good meeting with Yuri


Our hot water is officially turned off, but they’ve redirected the cold ater so it comes out through the hot water pipes… and the cold pipes are empty, so our toilet has to be manually refilled from the shower after every use. I’m back to some version of Ramenskoe’s 2L bottle showers, heating up water in the chinette and doing a pour shower kinda thing. Elder Price just does the ‘manly’ way, straight up freezing shower!


Yesterday we had service in the clinic, washing windows again. Wait, I wanted to describe our morning run, against a thin wall of water. When it rains here, it’s about 120% humidity and you can basically take a nice drink of air. It’s funny, because people carry umbrellas even though the rain isn’t falling, it’s just sitting there, hanging around and the more you move, or faster you move, the more rain you run into.


We met with Boris last night and for the first time in our 3-4 meetings, I truly felt a deep concern for his eternal welfare. It was hard for me, because it was a break up meeting and as Elder price pointed out, I was asking some very bold and pointed questions. I was trying to stir him up to remembrance of the God who gave him life, with whom he lived in the pre-earth life. But he’s lived 58 years without God and he’ll live to the end of this life without him too… He tried to pray, but gave up in the middle, and how it killed me to take the Book of Mormon back as he handed it to me and said I should give it to someone else. We declined staying for more 5 year old cherry compote, and went to our meeting with Yuri.


That was a good change. We taught Yuri some of the commandments and he’s going to live the law of chastity and word of wisdom.


6/5/08
Just one of those days, had a good weekly planning session. One of those drudgery days, when your love for the work isn’t quite enough to outdo the amount of rejection and strange looks we deal with. Just try and make tomorrow a better day.


6/6/08
District meeting at the McCunes, watching the Preach My Gospel DVDs about finding almost makes you wonder if it really is that easy in other parts of the world!


Found out that I’ll be having a visa trip to Madrid Spain in mid-July, and an opportunity to attend the temple after a year’s absence! It’s definitely taken for granted in places like Utah, or at home in Boise, and I am going to make regular temple worship part of my life when I return.


6/7/08
English club, Elders Foote and Kulikovsky are having some issues, played ball with some local guys about our age. Gave out a few invitations and building some friendships.


6/8/08
Church! Good meetings with President Mikulin and then with Sergey Kazachinsky (branch mission coordinator). A good fast for courage and boldness and a renewed energy in contacting.


6/9/08
The water saga continues. We figured it out, kind of… they turned off our hot water, but then redirected the cold water into the hot water pipes, because we have to manually refill our toilet after every use and our washing machine won’t turn on.


Family home evening with the young single adults last night, and it was really good for Yuri to see and get to know some people his age in the church, especially since our own branch hasn’t been the most active in fellowshipping him.


6/10/08
On a split with Elder Kulikovsky and already seeing the troubles that may lay ahead for me in the future when serving with other companions…. Especially when dealing with issues of obedience. Elder Kulikovsky has big problems with listening to music that isn’t exactly inviting the spirit. Pussycat Dolls, Mariah Carey, Fergie… not exactly the most uplifting music in the first place.


Lesson with Sergey, their one investigator, who can’t get past the word ‘Gentiles’ in the scripture, polygamy, and alcohol (even though they haven’t passed the first lesson yet). We taught about prayer and Elder Kulikovsky tried way to hard to answer every question he had and so our discussion was 1.5 hours.


6/11/08
End of split, interviews with President Craney. Pretty sure that Elder Parker has secured me a spot on the ‘trusted’ missionary list. Apparent from the last few interviews… and it seems that I may need to use that position to put in a good word or two for Elder Price.


Got J dubbed tracting yesterday, interesting experience. Never heard so many scriptures without feeling the spirit. I think we’ll avoid entering any homes of Jehovah’s Witnesses from now on. They don’t teach, they try to prove themselves right and you in error by the Bible… it really is sad.


Oh yeah, doing laundry at the McCunes tomorrow!


6/12/08
District meeting… I hate doing laundry in Russia with a dryer… pointless. But maybe the Lord has his own ways of trying our patience, however trivial and ridiculous they may seem.


Tossed a stray soccerball back to a girl on the street, hit her in the face :) Elder Price and I busted up laughing. And then I accidentally knocked 2 boxes of juice off the counter at Perekryostok (grocery store) and he lost it. A nice upbeat ending to a day that otherwise felt pretty worthless.


6/13/08
Weekly planning, stood up by Fyodr, and sports night. Played with Sasha (less-active) and Valenteen and his brother (English club, youth conference, Mom is the sister’s investigator). Got balled by a regular streetballer, a girl nonetheless.


6/14/08
Some nasty chili, English club, Igor showing up out of nowhere, more about him tomorrow.


6/15/08
So yesterday was Saturday of a 4 day weekend. June 12 is Russia Day, whatever that’s supposed to mean, so very few people came to English club. Elder Foote and I were discussing the situation of one of the less-activites they’re working with, when a man came in. I directed him to the beginning group, then he went out to take a smoke before going in. He went out, and upon return, came to us again, but this time asking about our church. Elder Foote and I closed the door and taught him a first lesson, Igor is his name, and we gave him a Book of Mormon.


But he had some weird questions after the lesson (UFOs, crop circles, Europeans amongst the Indians before Columbus) and not quite sure about those. But we have his number, and we’ll see about another meeting early this week.


Today was Sunday, yet again Elder Price was in a frustrated mood from not understanding people at church. Did some tracting without much success. Blessed one family’s home (apartment), like President Cranney did on his mission. Elder Price, unfortunately, seems to be losing faith in our finding efforts to some degree.


6/16/08
First time roller-blading in VDNX. Only ate it once, although my feet show a little worse for wear (blister or two). Always hard to find quality footwear for renting, when you’re a size 48 in Russia!


Did some go-kart racing too, then went to FHE with Yuri to the YSA FHE. We’re going to just send him next week and “not be able to make it.” He got us some framed pictures from Belarus as souvenirs. He’s basically the man.


6/17/08
Running the split with Elder Foote. Talked to a man (not quite Russian Orthodox), with a big ol’ beard (black & white) for 30-45 minutes on the street. All he knows about the Mormons is from one of the Sherlock Holmes books. He said he’s for polygamy, we told him that we don’t practice it now, and he says ‘Dang, I was too late!’


Our toilet and washer started working last night, after Elder Price took all of our dirty laundry to the other elder’s apartment.


6/18/08
Back to companionships. Meeting with Yuri at Sasha and Marina Sterligov’s place. 2 hours to handle 10 commandments, Sabbath day, law of the land, follow prophet, tithing and fasting. They (Sasha) like to go a little deeper than is needful. Good though for Yuri to be meeting people in the branch. It’s always a little awkward there, because when Marina is talking you look at her, and when you glance back to Sasha, he’s looking at you like ‘Whatchya checking out my wife??” and by then you’ve missed the last few things she’s said, and things just get weird. Plus Sasha was pushing temple garments when he started talking about having our character shaped by willing obedience to the commandments in preparation to receive a part of God’s authority. Hold on home slice, we’ll take a two-step back and save this discussion for a year when Yuri’s in temple prep!


6/19/08
Weekly planning, tacos, the Ashan isn’t open yet (no blender). Member meeting with Chizhovka family. Cut-a-hole-in-the-paper-and-step-through-it spiritual thought. They’ve already seen it :( crazy how I’ve been in the church for 20 years and haven’t seen any of these spiritual thoughts, yet all the members here have seen it all! I guess missionaries in the states aren’t as creative?


6/20/08
District meeting at the McCunes with a much appreciated addition from the McCunes (10 minutes of marriage preparation advice). Yesterday, we were schooled in the characteristics of a good listener (eye contact, feedback, attention, etc.) and in how to respond. Don’t try to solve the problem right away, pick up on the feelings of the person and try to alleviate those (exasperation, anger, uselessness, inadequacy) and the problem solving comes later. Elder McCune put it this way, your wife doesn’t want you to solve her problems. She knows how, she just wants your ear and sympathy, and then maybe, maybe your help.


Elder Foote is about to break. Weird encounter coming out of the bathroom at McCunes with him… “Do you know anything about transfers?”


Sports night with Sasha, Yuri, Valenteen, and the ‘stanians as always! And almost forgot, a 70 year old lady talking our ears off about how good life was during the CCCP compared to now… and Elder Price not understanding a word of it!


6/21/08
Bought a blender! English club, Igor with UFO questions stood us up. Went to the Gregory’s place with Yuri for dinner. Said he asked his great grandma (at her grave) about baptism and that he felt a calming peace. But then says he hasn’t gotten an answer yet?! We’re going to have a good lesson though, Tuesday, all about that stuff so he can come to accept a baptismal date.


6/22/08
Smoothie breakfast, worst idea ever. I was hungry on the metro to church, an hour after drinking mine. Sasha Kushnikov was at church (less-active, he’s been coming out to sports day) and Yuri as usual (except in a shirt and tie this time.


Made peach cake/cobbler for Tatyana Ivanova, but she wasn’t home (we’re supposed to home teach her, but she won’t let us), so we dropped it off with a new conference issue of the Liahona at Andrei’s home, hoping he’ll get it and open a little more to us.


Yuri sent us a text how he read “the word of the God” all of Sunday (Book of Mormon and Conference edition of Liahona) and felt his faith growing. We need to get this fool a baptismal date!


6/23/08
Really good companionship study with Elder Price, talking about Romans 5:1-3 or 3-5 or something and his patriarchal blessing. We went to the market and bought companionship ties and I got my little murse / side bag for 400 roubles and Elder Price got his backpack for 600 roubles.


We gave Lyudmila Lubskaya a blessing for her health (back and legs). We did a little spiritual thought about faith before hand, using James 2:20 and DC 130:20-21 and how we show our faith and love through obedience, how blessings work only by faith.


Elder Price anointed and then I sealed the blessing. It’s so awesome knowing you’re worthy and having complete peace of mind in pronouncing a blessing. Although I didn’t, and usually don’t, experience the classic “they weren’t my words” or “I opened my mouth and I can’t remember what I said”, I do and did feel that my words in giving that blessing were right and true to the Lord’s will and blessing for her. Afterwards, Vladimir treated us to some compote and cookies… as usual :)


6/24/08
Our last quality pan gave out today (frying pan) so we got a new 28 cm beast for 500 roubles and which will be money for pancakes.


Meeting with Yuri about the Holy Ghost and how we receive answers, and how he received his baptismal answer already (that peaceful feeling at his great grandma’s grave). He said his question for her was more along the lines of “would I be turning my back on my ancestors, on you, and my family if I was baptized into this church?” and his answer was that peace. And the thought that it wasn’t important if he be in the Russian Orthodox church or not, but what kind of person he is, what qualities he develops.


So we obviously extended the baptismal commitment again, mentioning July 19th as a date. He shied away and related the following story:


Organized government appeared in Belarus at an early time, 9th century or so, and because of this government, the territory of the nation grew rather quickly. By the 12th century, the territory of the nation was large, but the nation was weak. There reigned many princes throughout the land. One prince had a daughter. His kingdom bordered the sea, and a group of Catholic crusaders settled there. They tried to fight and overthrow the prince, and secure the kingdom for the pope, but could not defeat him in battle, so they sought other means.


They kidnapped his very young daughter and held her ransom for the kingdom. The prince would not turn over the kingdom. The prince would not turn over the kingdom. The crusaders treated his daughter like one of their own. She never was in want or need of anything, and they raised her Catholic. When she had grown to maturity, her father was allowed to visit her, but she didn’t recognize him. She was a stranger in her own country, and had been transformed into another person.


Yuri shared that he wants to be able to read that story in the future and not feel like it’s in the least degree similar to his own experience. He says he needs time. Although how much? Who knows.


6/25/08
So Elder Price was mad at the world after last night’s meeting, because he was having trouble with Russian during the lesson and then Yuri went into that story and he didn’t understand any of it. So he prayed when we got home while I made him a smoothie and did my District Leader duties (phone calls to other companionships and what not).


We found a Super Sportsmaster store while contacting yesterday and I bought some push-up stands and Elder Price got a ‘Big cobra’ style coil thing with handles for working his arms and chest.


We played ball for the last time. Kind of came to the realization that we’ve been a little too lenient with ourselves of late. That the Lord blessed us and instead of stepping it up in expression of our thanks, we got careless. So we’re going to do things a little better from now on.


6/26/08
So that whole getting our act together and working more effectively business will have to wait until July, because my companion is in Spain from Saturday until Tuesday and I’m just trying to figure out how we’re gonna get through the weekend.


Last District meeting w/Sister Graf, we had sloppy joes and Elder Kulikovsky’s cake. We caught the “Russian National Show of Dance” at HOtel Cosmos at VDNX metro and picked up some sweet moves for dancing back home. 


Random Aleksei guy approached us in the metro wanting to come to church. Lost an invitation he had a while ago, but the rush separated us before we could get his number (6-people-touching-at-a-time rush)


6/28/08
Craziness… pure insanity. So… transfers were yesterday and pure havoc ensured. Missionaries have been pulled from Reyootov (4 elders) and 2 of them are now in our district. With the addition of Elders Strong and Cunningham, we’re sitting at 12 in our district now with Elder Price in Spain from today until Wednesday, I’m running a threesome with Elder Woffinden and Cragun. 


6/29/08
Ridiculous, and we went to church.


6/30/08
Epitome of lame. P-day hanging at Elder Kiefert and Warren’s apartment, along with Elders Berlin and Baysinger. Elder Woffinden and Cragun should be a good companionship once I get out of the picture. Tomorrow, another day of grechka (buckwheat), eggs, and rice.


7/1/08
July mid-summer night’s nightmare! The full story from Friday.


We get a call Thursday night from the Zone leaders, informing us that everyone is to come in for transfers. We knew Sister Graf from our district was out and weren’t expecting any other kinds of changes. But lo & behold, there is a problem with those elders living in Reyootov with registration, so President Cranney pulled them to prevent any kind of deportation issues which might have come up. Two of the elders, Cragun and Woffinden, were temporarily reassigned to our branch. They were sent to live in the apartment in Sokolniki, which will sleep 6-7 (with one shower, one toilet, and one kitchen).


Then, the districts were realigned, and the ‘Sokolniki / Mezhdunarodny’ district was dissolved. The ZLs are in Mitishi’s district and Elders Strong and Cunningham are in our district. So we finally can approach some form of unity in our work in the branch. But I’m dealing with 10 missionaries at the current moment! Actually, the best part is yet to come, that Friday night, Elder Price had to be in Lognya to catch a 5am flight out to Spain the next day. So Elder Cragun and I dropped him off to meet up with Elder’s Terry and Earl and we went to sports day to meet up with Strong, Cunningham, and Woffinden. In the end, we ended up at the Sokolniki apartment, the 5 of us, living out of suit cases and handbags and waiting out the week. Today, I’ll hook up with Elders Wirthlin and Sneddon and we’ll meet with the Chizhovka family and spend the night on Pervomayskaya before heading into the office tomorrow to reunite with our companionships.


It’s been an interesting experience living in a 5 some. Unfortunately, Elder Strong is done and he’s counting the days (literally) of his last transfer. His parents are coming to pick him up and he’s just chilling, thinking way more about home, listening to the ‘Eagles’ and whatever. Elder Cunningham’s been dealing with that for a transfer now, and is pretty sick of it and willing (almost too willing) to talk about it. They seem to be pretty indifferent in attitude towards each other. Just another warning, as was serving with Elder Smith, of the results of lack of love and faith for the people. The drone of missionary work will wear on you if you don’t have the motivation and desire and faith and love.


7/4/08
Woo, 4th of July! So a few days of madness have passed and only now have the opportunity and physical ability to record them.


Rewind to July 1st. Elder Cragun, Woffinden, and I meet with Aleksandr, the 54 year old guy Elder Foote and I met on the street during a split, who stroked his beard with every question and thought we still practice polygamy. Much to his disappointment, we informed him that we stopped a long time ago. Elder Foote and I gave him a Joseph Smith pamphlet, so Elder Cragun, Woffiden, and myself were meeting with him for a first lesson. He read the Joseph Smith pamphlet and said he was very curious to find out more, to find out how we differ from other Christian churches. We talked to him about continuing revelation, how we have a modern living prophet, and we mentioned the word of wisdom and law of chastity.


He told us of an interesting dream he had. He said that he saw a person, an American very clearly, but couldn’t put a name to the person. He said he recognized him as me, Elder Taylor. But then, after I called him Monday night to set up the meeting, he realized it was actually Joseph Smith! He said that everything was kind of lit up, glowing, and that a table sat next to the man, upon which were weapons and firearms of all kinds. But all were broken. No wonder he was so curious to meet and know more.


After that, I met up with Elder Wirthlin and Sneddon and visited the Chizhovka family so Elder Wirthlin could see them. Spiritual thought about dating. Then we ate at Uncle Sam’s cafe off Partizanskaya metro and all the way out to Mituishi to spend the night. Found a bed, Elder Sneddon gave me a rug to use for a blanket… I opted to just use sheets… and settled down to sleep when the doorbell rang. The police wanted to come in and check our documents… at 10:30pm! We told them to come back tomorrow, they agreed, and then Elder Wirthlin took 2 hours to tell me his girl situation. I just lay quietly, then fell asleep after he got tired of talking.


Next day, July 2nd, Elder Jonovich and London won’t feed us breakfast, so we go down to the corner store to get some stuff. But the store doesn’t open till 8am, so we go back, wait, come back and get some eggs, OJ, make some omlettes. Elder Wirthlin takes forever to pack, etc. We finally get out of there, take the train into Moscow, and hit the metro and make it to the office with 2 of the 3 bags breaking in the process. This is all of Elder Wirthlin’s stuff we are carrying. We ride up the elevator with President Pieper, and he just chuckles when he sees the taped up handles and busted wheels on Elder Wirthlin’s luggage.


In the office, I get my companion back, we leave, but not before finding out that the Elders going to Spain that morning, missed the flight and had to get new tickets, and Elder Muradyan missed his flight back home to Armenia.


We got back, Elder Price is way out of it because he caught the red eye w/a mom and baby sitting next to him. We’re supposed to meet with Yuri, at Baumanskaya, outside the metro and walk to find a bench or park or somewhere to sit and talk. Some girl dupes me into taking a free bag of mayo (she hid it behind the paper!) kind of like the roller-blading free Coke distributors. We wander, end up in this little garden next to a Russian Orthodox temple, sit at a bench, and the other guy on the bench starts up a 20 minute conversation. Come to find out that he met with the missionaries 3-4 years ago in Ukraine, knows about the Book of Mormon, Pearl of Great Price, a little about temples, etc. So we exchange phone numbers and we just go back to the metro, seeing as our time was taken.


Then the 3rd district meeting. Elder Strong introduced himself as “I’m going home this transfer.” He’s for sure done, unfortunately. Met with Sergey Botezat, they are going to Moldova for a month to be with family, but we’ll see them again before transfers.


Then met with Yuri, set a baptismal date! He just did the whole unexpected thing, “so, about baptism… I don’t think it’s worth it to wait until August. How about the end of this month?” So the 26th of July it is! We all repented together last night too, in our nightly prayers. We’ll celebrate independence day tomorrow with Yuri in Kusovo Park.


7/5/08
Lamest sports night ever yesterday. Only Yuri showed up and the usual ‘stanians’ and kids who hang out down at Novokuznetskaya. In weekly planning, we set a few goals to work better and more effectively use our time. We’ve set a goal to have a new investigator every week. We’re actually going to work at it and keep it in prayer and in mind. We’re also going to focus on using our time at night better. Actually doing some form of nightly planning every night, as opposed to just calling everyone and then getting to bed on time.


We also did some tracting yesterday. I don’t know how it is in other parts of Russia, but in Moscow, it’s a victory if you ever see a person’s face. Most peer through the peephole and yell ‘who’s there??’ or ‘who are you??’ or ‘what do you want??’ and then complain about how they can’t understand you when you answer. Maybe it’s my accent… or maybe it’s the fact we’re talking through a door! Then they usually tell you to leave, or that they don’t want to listen to our message or talk to us. One young man opened the door and came out into the stairway. We told him that we had a message about strengthening families and living with our families forever thanks to Jesus Christ. All he said was ‘no idea.’ So we invited him to free English club, ‘no idea’ once more, said he was busy, and then went back into his apartment.


We taught a shortened, watered down version of the 2nd lesson to a shirtless old man, Vadim, in his kitchen. He’s got a daughter in America, Chicago specifically. We’ll see what more will come of it. Really friendly at first, but as we were leaving it became apparent that he let us in because we were American and not because we’re missionaries!


7/6/08
Crazy branch council, like a madhouse! But first off, yesterday we had a meeting with Igor, the weirdo from Ukraine (who met with missionaries there). He was wearing the same clothes as when we talked to him on Wednesday. A purple jacket and one of the little umbrella hats (purple too). He’s one of those who are ‘above’ organized religion and not willing to be ‘tied down’ by commandments and worldly things, like the formality of spoken prayer. Looking for somebody more apt at ‘exchanging opinions’, that is, arguing and teaching without the spirit. So we’re not going to meet with him anymore.


Then we supported our little Yuri at the Independence day celebration, where he didn’t even play in the volleyball game he was supposed to play in. Found a ‘batting cage’ for Elder Price to take a few swings, and it rained like crazy. Got some good pictures of the flooded streets and we chilled under an umbrella for 1.5 hours.


Next up, our crazy branch council on Sunday! It seems that everyone comes with a personal agenda, and so there was quite the ‘exchange of opinions.’ It’s especially difficult because we don’t know what the branch members expect or want from us as missionaries… or how we can help. Passed the sacrament to Natasha Derevyagina and got stood up by a contact.


7/7/08
Lame-o p-day. Got some more ties at the market, along with ties for the elders in Spain. Then bounced over to the office to pick up Elder Price’s package and registration and get a baptismal suit for Yuri. I’m starting to hate the metro and how much time we spend traveling. 


Wrote home and got some groceries, ate pancakes for dinner, and ended up listening to a crazy guy talk our ears off for 45 minutes, everything from Pagan holidays, to sports, to AIDS, to slavery, to greek mythology, quantum physics, Christ, crocodiles, and love. Yuri was his name, he wore two watches, a St. Petersburg seaman’s cap, a pin of a black cat, and another of two hearts and an arrow which read ‘I love you.’ By the time we broke off the conversation, we had spectators. He sang us a song and now I’m out.


7/8/08
Just one of those days when nobody wants to listen. As Elder Price put it “there must have been something in the news that said ‘if you see people walking around, they’re probably missionaries and you probably shouldn’t talk to them. They wear white shirts and ties.’”


Although we did get a contact (and referral, for his sister) from a good guy. He’ll be in Italy from the 20th of July until sometime, but he said he’d definitely call when he returns… we’ll just catch him for a first lesson or two before he leaves.


Met with Yuri and went over the baptismal interview questions and had him try on the white baptismal suit. We showed him the physical process of how the baptism is performed. He had a question about service and what it means to serve other church members, and we talked about callings a little and his face lit up! He’s so ready, and it will be awesome to hear about and see his progress in the coming months. Then we bought some ice cream together after the lesson.


7/9/08
First meeting with Greg. He was born in Uzbekistan, with an Armenian dad and Uzbek mom. He studied in Moscow to be a doctor and then moved to America as a refugee in 1999. His and his mother’s homes were burned by Muslims, so the USA gave them refugee status and he lived in Sacramento (Roseville) for 8 years. He’s an American citizen and practiced heart surgery there in America. He said a little while ago his dad (who lives in Russia or Uzbekistan or something) got sick and he decided to come back to Moscow to be closer and because he knows that his skills and experience are much more needed here than in America. He wants to teach other doctors what he has learned and help people. He knows the doctor who performed Boris Yeltsin’s operation, personally and he’s just a really great guy.


We taught him the first lesson, in English, in his unfurnished apartment. He pulled his air mattress in and we just sat on it, had some tea, and taught him about Joseph Smith. He went to a Pentecostal church in Sacramento and is very religious. He’s just all-around a great guy. He’ll be coming to the international branch on Sunday, while i’m in Spain. When we were part way through, his 90 year old neighbor rang his doorbell. She thinks she needs to go to the hospital. She called the ambulance, but they won’t take her. She opened her door as we were leaving and just looked at us, then Greg over on the side, looked at her and says ‘Hi Grandma’ in English, then ‘Hi, it’s me, Grisha!’ in Russian. It was way funny!


Then a member meeting with Politovy last night. They’re empty nesting pretty bad and reminisced about the church and missionaries 10-15 years ago, and then we had to leave. Didn’t quite get to the spiritual thought :| 


7/10/08
Some long sessions of contacting, which included a visit to a Russian cemetery and the finding of an excellent place for sports… with the only problem being it’s distance from any metro. The cemetery is quite different from any I have seen before. The land is not cleared and each family or group of relatives or person has their own ‘fenced’ area, which may consist of up to 4 plots. The plots are rather haphazardly aligned and tree stumps, weeds, and ground cover add to the unkeptness. Although it is very apparent as to which families have money and which do not. Almost every burial plot has a ‘garden’ of some kind growing on the land which lies at the front of the headstone. These gardens are about 3 feet in length and are slightly raised from ground level and surrounded, usually, by a small cement wall of about 6 inches in height. Many of the newer headstones have pictures of the deceased, while a few even have statues in the likeness of the deceased. Pretty sure I’d wet myself if I was there at night!


7/11/08
Zone conference out at Rosinka, where President Cranney’s family lives. It seems as though the adversary is throwing out all the stops to try and get missionaries out of Russia. We already know that no more American missionaries are being called to Russia (only Ukrainians and Russians and a few central Asians probably like Gosha and Artur). President Cranney showed us a chart of the progressive decline in the number of missionaries in our mission and when our group leaves next spring, there will only be 25-30 missionaries left. They’re talking about applying for temporary residency for some Elders, meaning they would serve in a single city for a year’s time.


7/12/08 - Spain visa trip
Ate at Rostiks, the Russian KFC (higher prices, lower quality). Then we flew down to Spain. Elder Lemon and I sat together and had some fun dealing with Katya, our stewardess who was working her first flight. Got in way late, 1:30-2am. Spain is so clean… at least the Madrid metro is. President Hill, the MTC president here, is money!


7/13/08
Sunday in Spain. Got about 4 hours of sleep. Had a little meeting with President HIll where he shared his thoughts about this whole visa situation. We looked at Alma 8, especially verse 18 and how that can be likened unto us. He pointed out the 3 things that Alma did:
1. He received the message
2. He returned speedily
3. He entered the city by another way


We had priesthood and Sacrament meeting in spanglish. Had some time later in the day to walk around the temple complex. There is a 400 year old olive tree on temple grounds and we saw a real chapel again for the first time in a long time.


Saw the cleanest parking garage I’ve ever seen, under the MTC, between the MTC building and the stake center here on the temple grounds.


Then we sang spanish hymns down on the temple grounds and despite our inability to speak spanish, it was a lot easier than trying to sing Russian hymns was the first time.


Talked with Elder Schwartz for a bit at night. He’s the one who leans out the bathroom window and talks with the sisters (or at least with one sister). When I walked into the bathroom last night, he was knocking on the walls and mirror, playing with beats back and forth with the sisters on the other side. I just started talking to him… he’s 22, from Jacksonville FL and is a Hurricanes fan. He’s got a little brother who is serving in Japan right now. I wonder what kind of situation that would be like, to have your little brother go serve on a mission before you. We’ll see if we can’t help him a little bit w/o him realizing it.


7/14/08
Lots of the same food still, breakfast and a devotional from a return missionary lady who served in Spain. She talked about her mission, and apparently she once drove a bus from Denmark to India and back, studying education systems, practices, and individual teachers through the many nations their group visited. It took a year and a half to raise the money, and 2 years to complete the journey.


The rest of the day we watched church movies (Mountain of the Lord, Joseph Smith: Prophet of the Restoration, An Ensign to the Nations). Played ball and had a way awesome meeting with President Hill, President of the Madrid MTC. We discussed a few questions: from Elder Baysinger about being too attached to investigators or not. Putting faith and trust in them and being hurt. From Elder Lemon about more effective spiritual thoughts in English Club. From Elder Jensen about being a scriptorian and teaching from the scriptures. From me about coming to agreement with companions when you don’t see eye-to-eye on things and keeping the spirit in long hours of finding (whether tracting or contacting). The answers of which will be somewhere recorded upon return to Moscow.


7/15/08
The distribution center, way expensive, but came away with two journals. One to give to Yuri and the other for a future investigator, who will accept baptism. Spent the rest of the day in the temple from the 9am session to helping in the baptistry to eating in the cafeteria to another session and more helping in the baptistry. It really made me want to serve a temple mission in Kiev when I’m older and use my Russian to bless the lives of the saints and to perform the Lord’s work for his children there too. But mostly because I’ll know Russian and be in the position to do a lot of good.


Now we are returning to Russia on the red-eye. Bought a nice apron in the Madrid airport, paid way too much for it (20 Euro) but it’ll be put to good use!


7/16/08
Pondering upon our experience in the Madrid temple Tuesday, I was reminded of the calming feeling I experience there and the strong desire to someday in some way devote much of my time to temple work. Whether as a temple worker back in America or as a missionary with my wife in Kiev.


Upon our return to the office from the airport, Elder Baysinger and I slept through our bus stop. We realized early enough though, that we got off at the next stop. We asked one man for directions to the metro, and in a very American accent he told us. We found out he’s from Ohio and here with his family, working until July of next year. We got his number, and then met up at the office. Went back with Elder Price. Got some good, actually faithful and genuine contacting in with quite a bit of success, then a meeting with Yuri about the Priesthood. It’s way humid now and we’re just a couple of sweat balls as Elder Price puts it.


7/17/08
District meeting actually seemed useful and worth it this time. We’ll see if after 3.5 transfers as district leader I’ve finally figured out how to teach / hold a district meeting, or if it was just a fluke.


Did Sister Pinkal’s stupid picture CDs, and did some good contacting in the pouring rain. Talked to one young man, Oleg, 28, for a while. Sad to see someone living without God, and only for sex, fun and money. He was a nice guy, but you wonder what he’ll be thinking 15-20 years from now, what he’ll be regretting.


7/18/08
Been raining pretty crazily for the past few days. No sleep, because we had a thunderstorm that made me feel like the second coming haad arrived and Moscow was being destroyed.


Contacting, barely avoiding the rain (except for having to run home from the metro). Need to buy ourselves another fan and aviator sunglasses. Also had weekly planning, trying to get the baptism all planned and our meetings with investigators all prepared for. Sports night, Elder Price sweat more than he’s ever sweat before. Talked about when we think our fellow district members will get married. Elder Foote and Sister Pinkal, a match made in heaven, lol.


7/20/08
Few things to catch up on. Saturday, July 19th, got a couple of meetings to fall through. A money English club lesson (taught Elder and Sister McCune’s class along with ours), some ping pong.


Saw the funniest thing, at the corner to cross the street, we saw a man trying to flag down a taxi. I joked that he escaped from the hospital and lo and behold, as we get closer we saw that he was wearing a bath robe with grass stains and sandals, had a spot shaved in the back of his head with a set of 4 or 5 large stitches! He really had escaped from the hospital that was right on the corner! The taxi wouldn’t take him, so he crossed the road with us in bewilderment and waited at the bus stop on the other side. Crazy.


Sunday, the 20th, we had church as usual. A really good Sunday school lesson (courtesy of Brother Kostya Sterligov, who reminds me of Beast from X-men). Stayed for the international branch to talk to Pat afterwards. She’s an investigator of the sisters, from the Philippines, who has a baptismal date for August 2nd. I’m going to be interviewing her next Sunday. She asked if I would baptize her! So we get two baptismal services in two weeks at the end of this transfer. Hopefully it’s not so much success that President Cranney sees fit to send one of us packing come transfers.


7/21/08
Introduced me to gator-ball, a mix between soccer, rugby,  and football. Played with a soccer ball, you can run with it until you’ve been touched, and then you have to drop it. You can’t pick it up, only can grab it out of the air (and not off of a bounce). It’s played on a soccer field. Scoring with hands is 1 point, with feet is 2 points, and with head is 3 points. You can play just like soccer if you want, but then if you flick it into the air for someone else, it kind of turns into two hand touch football! 


FHE with Yuri. He isn’t really interested in making friends with any of the young single adults. I guess the Russian ladies aren’t his type.


7/22/08
Interviews, nothing worth much mention. Although Sister Pinkal and Hawkins are leaving, the sister’s area will remain open and in the near future the two other areas in our branch will be consolidated to one. Whether Prospekt Mira closes or Sokolniki, that’s still to be considered.


Elder Price and I had a good talk about what bugs me, and it seems to have resolved some concerns and overcome some obstacles we weren’t even aware of.


Meeting with Vladimir Ilichyov. Difficult for him right now, his vision is getting worse, he can’t comprehend what he reads… he just loves to have us come and open the scriptures and enjoy each other’s company and the spirit.


7/23/08
It’s a gut-wrenching feeling when your eyes are so opened by the Lord’s spirit for a moment to see all of your inadequacies, faults, and ways that you should improve yourself and the missionary work you do. I feel as though I’ve fallen out of discipline… as we start studying a little late every day (5 min), get to bed a little late every night (5 min). I’ve hit some habits that have seemed to have an overall effect on my ability to feel the spirit to the degree I wish I could. I need to remember what it felt like to want to share the gospel, but not know how to understand people or start. Now I’ve seemed to fallen towards the other direction. TIME TO BREAK OUT OF THE SLUMP.  From today on, every metro ride I’m talking to somebody.


7/24/08
As usual, Pioneer Day passes rather uneventfully in my life. Of late, I’ve had chance to think, perhaps too much, and ponder over my role in missionary work and my place in relationship with this work and with God. Unfortunately, or fortunately, it’s caused me to more deeply examine myself and my weaknesses. Especially in the last preparations for our last two district meetings, I’ve been doing a lot of reflection.


7/25/08
More contacting, weekly planning, planning English club, eating, and sports night.


I’m really not sure what to think about things… about myself, who I am or who I want to become. I guess I’ve kind of realized that my attitude towards my personality may very well be the complete opposite of what it should be. Although I’m not really sure what I do believe about it. Am I to be the same person as when I was at college? Is my personality, are my words, my characteristics to change or remain the same? How do I know and why?


7/27/08
Yesterday was crazy. So, Yuri was baptized at 12 ish. Let me set things out proper.


11am we met Yuri and Dima Timurshin in the metro, along with basically all the other missionaries showing up at the same time. We walked to the building, about 15-20 minutes from Kashurskaya metro stop. We got everything set up and waited on people for a while. Elder Price and Yuri were in white, chilling on the front row, while I went out into the hall to call the people who were supposed to:
1. Say opening prayer
2. Give talk on the Gift of the Holy Ghost
3. Say closing prayer
4. And bring the refreshments


Called the opening prayer, not available (probably in the metro). Called the talk, she was at the metro, apologizing for being late. I told her to come and hung up, as I did, the closing prayer walked in. The talk was also in charge of refreshments, so we were kind of banking on her. As we wait, 3 people walk in from off the street. One old drunk guy and then a few minutes later, a young couple. They start a friendly and fiery conversation with Elder Kulikovsky about the church never being lost, so there was no need for a restoration. We’re still waiting on opening prayer, talk, and refreshments. I call opening prayer, he says 3-5 minutes. It’s 15 after by now, so we go in and start (disband the heated conversation about the apostasy) to have opening prayer walk in right before the hymn, and talk / refreshments shortly thereafter.


We do the program, Dima Timurshin gave a good talk about baptism, then Nina Oblexovo about the Holy Ghost. 


Perform the baptism, Elder Smith and I as witnesses, Elder Price almost hitting Yuri’s head on the side of the font! (he didn’t plug his nose)


We return to the hall to sing as we wait for them to change. Nina has me come into the kitchen… her refreshments are 3 muffins and a cookie in a little soft cooler. So Andrei Sementsov, who’s presiding and conducting, gives me some money and I grab Elder Smith to run out and buy cookies, water, chocolate stuff, and fruit. Come back, we forgot cups… I go back with Elder Cunningham, come back, we’re already out of water, so I go with Elder Price, we get more water, and the lady at the store is probably way weirded out, my 3rd time there with 3 different people within 15 minutes.


Everything finishes up, I interview Maxwell from Ghana for baptism, he’s a go. We go to English club, lame lesson like always. Elder PRice doesn’t have a spiritual thought, so he just wings it pretty poorly. We get a promise from skeleton looking Dima that he’ll come to church when I leave.


We go with Yuri to dinner at the Gregory’s place. Good homemade cooking. Come home and crash.


Sunday -> church. All of 40 people there. I give Yuri the Gift of the Holy Ghost (Andrei Sementsov almost did, but my companion spoke up) and then after church we stayed for the International Branch and I interviewed Pat for baptism afterwards. I’ll be baptizing her on Saturday in a joint service with Maxwell.


Contacting we had a 67 year old lady in all seriousness tell us she would schedule a date with me if she were a young girl. Then she kissed the tri-fold we gave her and wiped the kiss off on our cheeks a few times. Then I had another “you’ll never understand the ‘Russian spirit’” guy who wanted to have a drink with me and talk about how he served in Afghanistan and how we’re a cult. I probably never will understand the Russian spirit, which is some kind of justification for not living your faith, because of your great religious heritage… or Russian pride masked as religious tendencies.


7/28/08
Big news from home, Stephanie Taylor is to become Stephanie Anderson fairly soon. Big sis is engaged and looking to tie the knot in November or December. Crazy how everyone up and decides to get married while Jason is away on his mission.


In other news, played ball for p-day yesterday, and in the evening we were yet again stood up for a meeting. We found 35 rouble 2L Fruktovy Sad and bought it for consolation, as we contacted out the rest of the night. That’s the 4th or 5th we’ve had stand us up in about a week’s time period.


7/29/08
Split with Elder Chemezov in the international branch. Met with Adlin, a former investigator from Haiti and id a first lesson review, and chatted with MAxwell afterwards as he prepares for baptism on Saturday.


Elder Chemezov is a bit of a weirdo, but I like him, a really good guy.


7/31/08
Back up to 7/30, Elder Price was way out of it when we met up and ended the split.


Contacted for a little and then met with Aleksander who read the whole Book of Mormon, and had that dream with Joseph Smith in it. He talked… a lot. 1.5 hour meeting and we didn’t really have more than 2 chances to get in more than a sentence. He’s humble in attitude and will read the BOM again, only more slowly this time and with personal, unwritten prayer.


Lunch in branch building and then meeting with Yuri about temples and eternal marriage. Elder Price was better by the end of Aleksander’s meeting.


Then the 31st district meeting about discerning between emotions and promptings from Elder Bednar’s 1999 Rick’s devotional.


Then to Park Pobedy for culture night. Museum was closed, just our luck. Spent a while talking to Elder Kulikovsky… kind of a split. My Russian accent is horrible and he’s helping me practice.


Finished the day with some contacting… not as bad as Elder Price makes it out to be. He almost freaked, but it’s all good.


8/1/08
He freaked. Not just almost this time. We called Elder Earl to sing him happy birthday, pretty sure it made him feel really good. That was Elder Price’s idea.


We went contacting until 2ish, bought a watermelon and made banana bread, and had that watermelon for lunch. In weekly planning, as usual, the not-so-bright side of Elder Price came out… the indifferent, cynical attitude towards planning, contacting, life, whatever. I guess I kind of hit him in the face in what I said at the end of the session. I called him out on attitude towards contacting, having the spirit when finding. That was about 6pm yesterday, and he basically hasn’t talked to me from that time on (it’s now 8:15am the next day). We’ll see how this reaction plays out, he was pretty upset at gator ball last night, except when they won. I’ve seen too many missionaries lose faith, hit the wall, and never getting back up for the rest of the mission. I don’t want Yuri’s baptism to be his only baptism. So easy to fall into the rut, you just can’t let yourself!
8/2/08
My first time baptizing (outside of the temple). I baptized Patricia Loobong Biag, a Filippino woman in her 40s, today. The sisters have been meeting with her, and I interviewed her for baptism. She asked me to baptize her, so I agreed! The spirit was very edifying at the service. There were two baptisms, Maxwell Ab… was also baptized. I also interviewed him. He’s a 23 year old student from Ghana, studying here in Moscow at Druzhba University on Southwest metro stop.


We talked with Dima Timurshin and Yuri about serving missions. It sounds as though they both want to, but not seeming probably in the near future. Yuri has at least a year before going to the temple, and Dima has 2 years of school left. They are 23 and 21 respectively.


Lots of rain, crazy guy out our window last night. Kick a car, wait for the alarm to stop, then kick it again. At one point it stopped going off, and after 3 or 4 kicks, he walked off defeated.


8/3/08
Dima and Gena, the Moldovan guys Elder Muradyan and I met, just showed up at church today. They went home to Moldova and returned, likely to find work. They have no work, no food, and no place to live. They’re staying on the street, at the train station. They talked with a few church members about it. We’ll see what happens, if we can’t help them some how.


Came out of Pervomayskaya metro today to a group of people singing “Friendship begins with a smile”, that was cool. And seeing some really funny little kids on the metro, and walking around helped keep my spirits as we faced quite a staunch amount of rejections today. Just got to brush your shoulder off, not pay too much attention or energy on that and move on.


8/4/08
Bowling with Elder Smith and Chemezov on Prospekt Mira. A PR of 120 for me… Elder Price won a Pepsi with a Turkey, backflips all day to celebrate.


Elder Chemezov got me a harmonica, golden bird for 145 roubles, and now I’m going to learn how to play!
Got stood up for both meetings we scheduled. Got a letter from Rebecca, pretty much made my day. Bought 18 liters of juice, money sale at Pyatyorichka.


8/5/08
To the office, found out that Vitali is doing well, and that Nadezhda, his wife, is actually coming to church now. Yegor, on the other hand, is completely inactive and his family (who had been meeting with the missionaries) has lost interest. Maksim showed up at church and told Elder Burgess that he is waiting on something and whenever that something happens, he will be baptized. I wrote Yegor and Maksim letters of encouragement, and I’ll get one more out for Vitali later this week.


Met with Yuri tonight and taught him how to bless and pass the sacrament, and reviewed the first lesson.


8/6/08
Found out that Elder Price is packing and moving out Friday. Hopefully he’ll stick around in our district. I’m getting a cold. Last district meeting of the transfer. It’s just one of those days that feel completely worthless. A little party for the sisters and Elder Strong with some investigators and church youth there, at the McCune’s place.


Drew pictures of our favorite scripture stories for district meeting and a little exhortation to find time to read from the scriptures every day.


8/8/08 - Sokolniki: Aleksander Polishuk
Transfers with a whole lot of changing. Elder Price slid over to the Sokolniki apartment, but stayed in our district. He’s now with Elder Cunningham.


I’m now serving with Elder Polishuk, who is from west Ukraine (the Kiev mission). He’s got two transfers left, so it’s a possibility that I’ll be killing him. He doesn’t know much English, so we’ll have a chance to help each other out with the languages. He’s way energetic, and kind of a little goofball, so it’ll be really cool to serve with him. Elder Lemon came into our district and Sisters Graf and Gorina both returned as well. It’s a pretty tight district. So we’ll see what kind of work we can do!


8/10/08
English club, church… same old same old. Contacting, getting Elder Polishuk acquainted with the area. Contacting in Izmailovsky park, getting the bird pretty emphatically from a guy pushing athis stroller who ‘doesn’t talk with cultists’


8/11/08
P-day -> volleyball, got figged by Zhenya (young kid) 


8/12/08
J-dubbed hard core by a lady a little more than middle-aged (probably Mom’s age) with a snaggle-tooth.


Plan of salvation again with Yuri with a little more detail this time, like the war in heaven.


Trying to deal with Sister Gorina’s crazy excitement and strange questions and mid-day phone calls. This seems to be looking like a long transfer… I’ll have to find some way to change things up and get a breath of fresh air.


8/14/08
Life with Elder Polishuk is interesting. He’s still working, but he’s a little trunky boy. Especially with the possibility of his twin brother serving here in Moscow for the last week of his mission. His brother is in St. Petersburg and finishes Oct 25 and he would come down and chill for a week. By then I’ll probably be somewhere else, but who knows.


Met an Armenian named Hamlet, talked for 1.5 hours, we’ll see what comes of it. Elder Polishuk and I let out some steam to each concerning Russian & Moscow pride. I’m trying to love the people, it’s hard.


8/15/08
Crap day, went to the office, weekly planning, ate, sports night.


8/17/08
Saturday was a branch picnic, half done by Elder Price and Cunningham at Dima Kupaev’s incessant request. About 25 in total showed up, 8 of which were missionaries. English club and yet another fig from a contact.


Sunday was church. PResident Cranney came and endorsed us missionaries, asking members to invite friends, acquaintances, and family to meet with us.


In priesthood it came up and we discussed the key point. We all heard the counsel from God’s appointed servant over this area, this mission, and now the question is whether people will respond. Will they do what faith requires and act? Or will they continue to justify the lack of missionary spirit by whatever means possible. I’m afraid Sokolniki needs a fireball missionary or two to get members interested in actually actively sharing the gospel.


Really bad missionary meeting, Sergey Kazachinsky and Elder Polishuk butted heads and things aren’t looking too great in that department. Home teaching w/ Igor Chizhovka to the Syslovy. So hot, so stinking hot. Elder Polishuk is hating Russians right now.


8/18/08
P-day playing ball at Moscow’s #1 streetball court, Riyzhskaya, like Sunset park in Vegas or Rucker in NY.


Had a nice run in with a drunk man and his little daughter, Maksim and Lybov. He was sweating so much that drops were coming off the bill of his hat on the pages of the BOM as he looked through it. He grabbed a few invitations and pass along cards from my pocket and gave them to his daughter, told her to read the BOM to me (seeing as I’m American, I can’t read Russian) and he wrote his name and phone number and his wife’s email all over this card and gave it back and told us to call, come visit, and then blew us a kiss and walked away!


8/19/08
Rain! Gave Valdislav an English Book of Mormon in front of Pervomaisky theater, gave Kadzhik a ‘Children’s Bible’ (stories from the Old Testament and New Testament).


Meeting with Sergey Botezat, Olga Kyznetsova, and Varvara (their almost 2 year old daughter) about the first presidency message for August.


Break through on the harmonica in playing ‘Nearer my God to Thee’ a few more days and I’ll have it down pat.


8/21/08
A certain lack of discipline has crept into my routine as of late. I’ll have to turn to Elder Polishuk for some additional help in that area.


20th we did service at a hospital on Babushinskaya (“washing” windows) and met with Yuri to review the 3rd lesson. Elder Polishuk’s knee and leg are acting up, which is bad.


21st was Zone conference. Talked about the importance of records (area book in particular) and the 3 end of mission questions from Preach My Gospel Chapter 8, page 152. Then about what it means to be soft / hard-hearted and how to change that. 


Met with Vladimir Ilichyov and Lyudmila Lubskaya and talked about Joseph Smith Jr and importance of reading the Book of Mormon. Vladimir was wearing the coolest shirt, “Hip hop #1 international competition.’ Tight.


Earlier in the day it was the first time in a long while that I’ve felt a direct impression to talk to someone. A man, sitting, reading on a dark bench on the path home from the metro. I approached and he didn’t want anything to do with us. We left, and I felt good that I actually am not so pansy that I can still follow promptings.


Later, after our meeting with Vladimir and Lyudmila, we contacted into a drunk atheist and I remember how he asked Elder POlishuk a question, and after his response, the man (named Vladislav) turned to me and said “I get the feeling that what he’s saying is memorized, can you tell me, what happened to you, what took place that caused you to believe in this?” And I believe the words which I spoke were by the power of the Holy Ghost, and that there was a direct correlation between my willingness to heed that earlier prompting and my ability to preach with the spirit to that man. He took a Book of Mormon, promised to read and try to pray, then tried to sing some Queen with me, “Don’t stop me now, fat-bottomed girls”


8/22/08
Spent a dumpload of time at Natasha’s, meeting Elder Polishuk (‘Doc’ by her nickname, like I’m ‘Brave Tailor’). Taught her the first lesson and got some ice cream for her.


Sports day, interesting conversation with Elder Polishuk about that, apparently our sports day is a service (to those who can’t play without having people to organize it) and for our physical fitness and our everyday sports (the ‘30 min’ we have to work out in the morning) is to keep us in shape from getting injured on sports night. A little different than I’ve ever thought about it, and can’t say that I agree with him.


And it seems like since this transfer started, we’ve had no success. People won’t listen to us on the street and the only ones who stop are either atheist, drunk, or both. He came in to Moscow (first time in his mission that he’s been in Moscow proper) expecting nothing, and that’s what it appears like we’re going to get. Hard to talk to him about having faith and setting goals when he’s got 22 months behind him and just looking at working and finishing in 2 months like he’s doing his time. He’s just ready to do whatever and not care about the work progressing or the people themselves. Thinks our area will probably be closed in the coming transfers, just hopes not till he goes so he doesn’t have to move again. He’s a way fun guy and he works, but the trunk is all up in his junk and the months and months of contacting, teaching, and rule-following have worn their wear. His twin brother wants to come at the end and he’s way excited about that. Maybe I’ve been entrusted with a little part of helping him stretch. He’s just content to go out on the same speed.


8/23/08
Elder Polishuk has been praying of late for a love of Russian people and he expressed how meeting Natasha Derevyagina was an answer to that prayer. Said she’s just like his aunt. And yesterday we had a few good conversations with people, including a middle-aged couple, that were blessings from God in helping him.


English, taught the most boring group, the beginning, met a man from Kentucky who was lost ‘Mormons in Moscow??’ He said after we crossed the street towards him. He’s here for a 2 week intensive language training program, good luck skippy! He lives in Munich and just came for fun.


An ounce of info I forgot to mention. A few days before this last transfer, I got a phone call from President Cranney. He asked about my service with Elder Muradyan, explaining that he wrote President in his email, and came to the decision that he was going home. The 2 transfers he served after his first with me, were with Elder Shaw in Zelenograd. He apparently, had only given out 3-5 invitations in those 2 transfers with Elder Shaw, and his mom had been asking him to come back home in her letters. He flew home for his visa / immigration card and stayed at home for a day or two, and it was really really hard to come back. So Vardges Muradyan, who reminds me a bit of Gurgy from “The Black Cauldron'' is now home, serving in his home branch.


8/24/08
Not good when you compare the international branch and our Sokolniki branch. Just the feeling right before sacrament, no brotherhood, no togetherness in ours, except maybe 2 or 3 pockets of families, while the international branch is buzzing with chitter chatter. Yuri broke his foot, not seriously, he’s got a small boot and can walk with that, and he still made it to the international sacrament meeting to partake of the sacrament. Elder Polishuk and I saw him hobbling toward the branch building as we left church, all dressed up in his church clothes and everything. What a show of his faith and how the Lord will bless him for following the commandments and not justifying. How many times have I heard ‘my leg hurt, I’m tired, I can’t come to church’.


Home teaching to Sasha and Marina, talking about missionary work. I feel, for some reason, like an idiot over there. I start to sweat whenever I start talking, when they talk, I remember how much Russian I don’t know.


Elder Polishuk says there’s a possibility that missionaries who haven’t served a year yet could be reassigned to other missions in the coming weeks. We’ll see if there’s any truth to these rumors.


8/25/08
Seth’s married, and I got a letter from him and Elizabeth from Nauvoo while they’re on their honeymoon. Went cruising on bikes at VDNKH, Sister Gorina flipped because we’re not doing culture night, went contacting with Elder Polishuk and got a phone call from President Cranney around 9:45pm. Mid-transfer this Friday and I’m sliding over to Krasnoselskaya to serve with Elder Chemozov as a zone leader and we’ll be in the international branch, English speaking. It’ll be a little taste of American missionary work, and there are a lot of great people and families we’ll have the opportunity to work with.


8/26/08
Service, washing windows in a Russian hospital hall while patients are carted down the uneven floor (bump, bump, bump). Quick lunch and out the door to meet with Yuri at his place, his rented room). Had tea, little ‘sandwiches’ and juices and a lesson review of the commandments. Going on pace for my goal of reading the Book of Mormon in Russian before the end of the year. Just started Mosiah and if I get 3-4 pages in a day, I’ll be set.


8/28/08
Wednesday we contacted a little, took Natasha out for a walk and shopping and packed. Thursday was our last district meeting at the McCunes and hopefully the last district meeting I’ll ever have to prepare the lesson for. I’m all about participating and helping, but it’s about time to give some other missionaries leadership opportunities. Feels like leaving home after packing up and going out, leaving my home of the last 6 months… just without the people attached to it. No family to leave, friends are still close at hand.


A picture is worth a thousand words, and I wish I had my camera out and ready for what happened the last time I took Natasha for a walk. WE passed by a homeless man on our way to the shopping complex. He was on two crutches, shifting his weight from one leg to the other, slowly lifting the opposite leg and repositioning it to keep his balance. On our way back, Natasha had us stop at a little bus stop stand and buy him some chips. As I wheeled her up, she thrust her arm out and leaned and gave him the bag of potato chips. An invalid in a wheelchair, reaching out with some small relief for a bum… that’s the kind of story we hear about in conference, read about in newspapers, and see in photo competitions!


8/29/08 - International branch: Andrei Chemezov
Money in the new area! Pizza Hut, saw Elder Smith off at Yaraslovsky station, met with Araya, a student from India, and taught him the Plan of Salvation. Good strong spirit there. Sports night after, showed up the regulars in their own game, soccer.


8/30/08
Taste test judges for a YW/YM activity. All the way out to Rosinka for it. Sister Gorina’s a little out of her league in a branch where activities like these are made possible by members like you, who fulfill, if not magnify their callings. Met some good members, came home and plov to actually get a meal. Tried to find an inactive, weekly planning, way awesome phone call with Greg, he’s the man. Asked about my family, we talked about marriage, so on and so forth.


9/1/08
Just like the Nephites, when things start going right, we tend to ease up, get lax, and it leads to idleness, distraction and for forgetting to fulfill the commandments (aka journal writing, full study, 10:30pm bed time, 8am study time). We’ll do better.


Well, it’s basically the most posh, awesome branch ever here. Church Sunday was great. Sacrament meeting dedicated to missionary work and the 3rd hour to using the internet in spreading the gospel. Had dinner at the Earl’s on the embassy compound. He’s an FBI agent. Then we visited the Simiskey’s while we were there.


Today we wrote home, Cami’s engaged & Aaron’s asking someone to homecoming. I don’t know which is bigger news! Had Chinese buffet, 199 roubles for as much as you can fit on one plate + sorbet (the same, as much as you can fit in a bowl). Stuffed myself, and then we had a lesson with Maxwell at the Wiebel’s home, about a 10 minute walk from Red Square. Brother Wiebel is one of the big-wig engineers at Boeing, he was on the team that designed the Boeing 747, says Elder Chemezov. Way nice people, offered their home if we ever need it for anything!


And tomorrow we’re having dinner with President Gibbons, from the 70 and Area Presidency, and having a lesson with a friend that he’s introducing to the missionaries.


9/2/08
Met the renowned Geza today, gave a spiritual thought about the 10 commandments and helped him a little with his English, and then he treated us to Sbarros. Dinner at the Rosinka restaurant, 500 roubles for 5 mozzarella sticks, 5 chicken wings, and 10 super greasy potato wedges with the Gibbons and Artyom, then a lesson at their house. We talked about free agency and the tangible blessings of living the gospel. Shared about my Mission Quest experience that was a major spiritual experience in my own personal conversion to the gospel. When I read the letter from mom and dad up in the mountains, and prayed aloud by myself there. Artyom gave us a ride home in his BMW X5, 4.4L 330 HP SUV. Way nice, cool guy, but the success of the world has got him riding pretty high. Has an iPhone, EU residency, travels Europe, works in antiques, drives a BMW SUV, eats at China Club (where the Duma representatives eat), flies business class. It’s gonna be hard to pull himself away from that kind of fast-paced, club-hopping money-making life unless something shakes him up, or changes.


9/3/08
3 meetings with Africans, and an institute missionary prep class with one student. Met with Geza about tithing, Daniel about Joseph Smith, and Ndongou about faith in Christ. Tomorrow we’ll go back to Rosinka… goody!


9/4/08
Spiritual thought with Isert family (pencil sharpener vs knife and continued consistent scripture study and prayer, etc. vs bursts of scripture study and prayer and church attendance). Way cool family. Carl and Ben are in the right path. Dinner with the Cozak’s (Henry Cozak = head coordinator of CES in East European area), a German family and then taught them a ‘twisted’ first lesson. Though they’d have an investigator, but not quite. REally cool though, his prayer to end it, he prayed for their own family to have their own missionary opportunities. Way money prayer, need to remember that when praying in members’ homes.


Also had district meeting in Mitishi, a long way to travel for a 1.5 hour, lame missionary meeting.


About 30-40 minute train ride, plus 10-15 min walk. Shared what we studied and what’s up in our areas for about 45 minutes, then watched Preach My Gospel movie (what missionary work “should” look like, in a world without Russian investigators, or members. We’re kind of playing on different grounds here. And then, Elder London said something about planting seeds and a Babushka who wanted to buy the Book of Mormon for a little less than we usually charge. I was a little disappointed, but what can you do. District meeting isn’t exactly Saturday Night Live or anything.


9/5/08
Elder Chemezov likes to talk, in English, in meetings. I’ll have to hone my interrupting without making it look like I’m interrupting skills, so that our teaching is a little more balanced. He also has a tendency to say a little more than needful, but that’s something I just need to stop being a little girl about and accept as part of his personality. For example, when arranging meetings, he runs through the whole day with whomever he’s speaking, “well, we have a meeting at 1pm with one of our church members, and then we’ll go to the station to meet some other missionaries, and then we’ll have some time at 4pm to meet with you, is that good?”


9/6/08
Branch BBQ / Picnic at Rosinka, pretty chill. It’s kind of bad because it reminds me of home, and makes you just want to hang out and not have to worry about doing missionary work and being such a shining example and always without fail, having the spirit, and always being Christlike and hearing and heeding every prompting of the Holy Ghost. There’s a lot of pressure on a missionary, and it can weigh on you. That’s why it’s so important to lean on the Lord and rely on His direction with all faith, despite the stares, judgments passed and expectations left unfulfilled.


9/8/08
Church on Sunday, was the strongest I felt the Spirit in quite a while, sitting in sacrament meeting and hearing testimonies. And so, I bore my testimony. Maxwel had a beautiful testimony that he wrote out :) But it was so amazing. He got a calling, “building coordinator”, being the calling, which seems to be associated with putting out and gathering up the hymn books, keeping things in order, etc. It’s great to see a branch where the number of male testimonies borne equals the number of female testimonies.


We had dinner with the Mackays right after church (family from Canada). Amazing roast with mashed potatoes, carrots, broccoli and Finnish milk, with some chocolate cookies for dessert. They had a taste similar to that of double fudge chocolate chip muffins from Costco!


9/11/08
September 11, 7 years. Crazy, seven years ago I was in the 8th grade and remember when I saw the second tower hit in my challenge class.


Last few days have been a little crazy busy, no-time-for-journal like. Go back to Monday… crap p-day. On Sunday night, we stopped by some members after dinner, including Travis and Laree Hansen (former BYU baller), Rick Page’s family (friends with the Channer family back home), the Kunzlers (he served in our mission 15 years ago) and has a family that reminds me of the Brintons / Smithers / Squires, and the Snows (Niels, the kid with braces and fast offerings). Travis told us to come out Monday and talk to his driver about quitting smoking. So, decided it was worth half a p-day to do it. Came out, and he was 40 minutes away when we got there. We came home and met Maxwel at night. Tuesday, we actually got that meeting. After meeting with Geza and talking about prayer, we went up to Pokrovsky hills and talked to the driver, Andrei, about smoking. Smart, cool guy, but not so resolved to quit yet.


We got acquainted and who knows, in the future we may get an opportunity to teach him more about the church. Travis wants us to. Afterwards, Travis sprung a 1st lesson on us with their maid, Joy. She’s a 7th day Adventist from the Philippines, but very humble and open to our teachings. Laree Hansen gave her a Tagalog Book of Mormon already, but she left it in the Philippines when she went back over the summer. We had a great lesson, with Travis playing the part of furniture in the corner (on Facebook on his laptop). We answered some questions and she’s coming to church this Sunday. At the end of the lesson she was crying, and after I prayed to close the lesson, the tears were just streaming down her face. We went to the office after that, re-wrote the contract for our apartment. 


Wednesday, the 10th, was a split with Elder Mendenhall in our area. Planned to hit up Tverskaya street for some international contacting, but a little prompting led us to Baumanskaya. Got a contact, the first Elder Mendenhall’s seen in at least a month he said, and came back to get Elder Jonovich his suitcase. Went and tried to contact on Yugo-zapadnaya, didn’t work. Had a meeting with Vincent, from Nigeria. Thought he figged us, we waited 15-20 minutes and just as we were turning to leave, he walked out of the metro. It was pouring, and we were caught in it once already that day on Yugo-zapadnaya, without umbrellas, and here we were, walking to the church building in the pouring rain with 1 umbrella for the 3 of us. The little strap to close the umbrella was hanging over my head the whole time, so I was just getting more wet! We couldn’t find a free room in the central building, because of the West mission’s English club. We made our way to the 3rd floor institute and just met there. It was a great review of Joseph Smith’s story and about the Restoration and the Book of Mormon. He committed to reading and praying, with the intent to act. He said he’d come to church Sunday. Way cool guy. Found out that night that Elder MEndenhall has a twin brother serving in Rostov, crazy Canucks.


Thursday we picked up some money from Braden Gibson, went out to Mitishi for district meeting, ended the split and came into Moscow. Got money from Elder McCune, then met up with Maxwel to pay his tuition. He’s good for the semester now, had the most expensive cake ever from Sbarro’s (come on Elder Chemezov!) and got figged later that night.


9/12/08
One of those kind of days, waited for Geza forever, helped him a little, talked about church and invited him to attend ‘Gospel Principles’ from now on. His Afghani friend picked us up and drove us home. Lunch, caught the 5:15pm bus from the embassy to Rosinka, only to have no one home to meet with. 3 appointments were set up, and all we got was Sister Whiteside to give us the extra key to Simon Gordon Smith’s place. We wrote two notes, one for the Whitesides and one for Brother Smith, tried the Bensfields (no dice) and caught the 7:40pm back to metro Skhodenskaya.


9/13/08
Longest walk of my life, from Universitet around the MTU campus, out to the Vorebyovsky gory observation deck, back to Universitet… ‘contacting’ all the way. At least we found chili peppers, so Monday we can get the chicken for white chili! Now some weekly planning.


9/14/08
Church was money. Vincent and Joy both came, and Kelly showed up too! It was branch conference, and President Rust and President Podsablaev both spoke about proclaiming the gospel at this critical moment for the church in Russia. The branch members were so very welcoming to both Joy and Vincent, that they both felt very much at home. Vincent’s just trying to figure out how to get to church again next week. He’s got little money, and is looking for work.


Good coordination meeting, dinner at the Meservy’s home (awkward, too formal for me), then had the Plan of Salvation lesson with Joy in the Hansen’s home, with her friend Dutchy and with Howard MAckay (basically an un-baptised member, who is the Hansen’s next-door neighbor), because Travis was out of town and we needed another male there. Joy is awesome! On her way to baptism, that’s for sure. Talked to the Shultz’s in the shuttle from Pokrovsky to metro sokom.


9/15/08
P-day, wrote home, bought some ties, total comes to 27, and I bought a new baptismal / temple tie. Sweet, high quality white one. Met with Maxwel at the McCunes for a little FHE, Sister McCune was out with pain from getting a tooth pulled the week before. Maxwel’s favorite Russian idiom, “Sailors don’t have questions!” aka “Oo matrosov, net voprosov”


Made white chili for lunch, but put in a little too much chili pepper, so it’s a little too spicy and overpowers the other spices. Plus, we used turkey instead of chicken, but it was the first try. Give me a few more tries and all will be perfect.


9/16/08
Need to start running / exercising again. It’s getting harder and harder to wake up in the morning and who knows, IN MY NEW AREA, it might be doable. Yup, got phone call to tell everyone about transfers and I fall victim to another move, only 3 weeks after coming into this branch. As Elder Chemezov would say, “President Cranney, you give it out!” Certainly unexpected, although in all likelihood connected with that strong prompting I had about a week back to tell President Cranney that I wanted to serve with Elder Earl. We’re all about stability in this mission… lol! 


“As he increased in activity and began to see the fruits of a people touched by the love of the Lord, and the Lord looked upon it, and saw it fit to give command that he take his preaching to another city, and there labor as he had for such a short number of days”
* From the book of Elder Taylor


Come Friday, we’ll see what things may come.


Great meeting with Vincent today in McDonalds, a few bus stops from the newest metro, “Slavansky Bulvar”. It looks like Harry Potter themed, really big and nice too. Two crazy tunnel things that are the entrances from the street. The bus routes are clearly outlined on maps just outside the metro. It’s a good improvement, plus it comes out of the ground in an apple orchard.


In the meeting we talked about his questions, how the Nephites didn’t understand God’s voice 3 times (3 Nephi 11) and how he feels like he’s not understanding it either, although he wants to. We taught about showing our faith by diligence and promised the blessings of comfort and assurance he will receive as he continues to meet with us, come to church, and read the Book of Mormon. Kind of did some prophesying in promising that, if he continues to meet with the missionaries and comes to church and reads, that he will find work, that the Lord will take care of him according to his obedience and faith.


9/17/08
Lunch at the Williams, Dick and Irina. He built Rosinka, has lived here, in Vegas, Connecticut, back and forth for about 20 years. Great people, he’s American, she’s Russian and she translated for Grandma the whole time. She lives with them in Rozhdenstveko, another Rosinka / Pokrovsky type development. It’s off of Putishinskaya, about 15 minute drive from Rosinka.


Then met the infamous Kelly. I’ll write his story. So Kelly was baptized in March or April. He’s from Cameroon, and a week or two after his baptism, he disappeared. No one could get a hold of him, and then, out of nowhere, we got a phone call one night from Kelly (this is beginning of September). He’s in Krasnodar, a city a few hours outside of Rostov. A few nights later, we get a call about 12:30am. It wakes me up and I pick up the phone, somebody says to call the number right back and that he’ll explain everything. I’m pretty out of it and everyone knows I’m not in the best mood if someone wakes me up while I haven’t slept very long. So I just go back to sleep. The next day, I call the number back, and a random Russian guy tells me that Kelly used his phone to ask for help. That guy drove all around Rostov, looking for the “church of the mormons” with Kelly, then Kelly decided that he needed to come back to Moscow. The guy bought him a train ticket on the condition that Kelly called back to let him know when he arrived.


He got here, we set up two meetings and he didn’t show, then Elder Hancock found him somehow, met him, then Kelly came to church. We met on Wednesday, turns out that he wasput in a deportation camp, robbed by the policemen who brought him in (phone, credit cards, clothes, money). Then he escaped after 3 months and came here. Those camps are just super corrupted, they throw in foreigners on false accusations, strip them of everything, leave them for months, then let them go when they can’t “find” a legit reason to deport them. Vincent had it happen too, back in February, and he was in for 5 to 6 months.


Then we went into the office, got a coat for him and updated Google Earth for Pervomayskaya area. 


At night, we had to go to Sokolniki elders for duct tape, picked up an ironing board. Elder Chemezov really likes doing the rogue, breaking minor rules, which he said feels like we’re “apostates’.. Like walking to another companionship place after 9pm in street clothes, it’s pretty entertaining.


9/18/08
District meeting in Mitishi. Kinda lame, again. Oh well. Got some more clothes for our African brothers. Richard G Scott looks like a penguin. 6 rouble pretzels from Perlovskaya station, to eat while on the way to the house.


More white chili and rice, the most amazing meeting with Maxwel.


He taught us about sacrifice, and his faith is so deep. I feel privileged to have worked with one of the Lord’s very chosen and noble spirits. Money verse he shared about God blessing missionaries in Matthew 19:29. He’s destined for great things, despite, or maybe foreshadowed by, the great challenges he’s facing at the moment.


Went to the Prokhorov family. Interesting to compare them with the Hansens. Young families, both have two kids, RM fathers, but how different their attitude towards us is. Trust from the Hansens, skepticism from Prokhorovs. How much more comfortable it is for everyone when we are welcomed. Alex kind of showed us the door, removing the ‘Alien intruders’ from their home… although it was a really good watermelon he served us.


9/19/08
Wrote 3 letters, to Joy, Vincent, and to Maxwel (included a tie in that one) and left my Albany Youth conference shirt for Kelly. Transfers in an hour and a half. Crazy beans.


9/20/08 - Dolgoprudny: Jeffrey Earl
So, the events of yesterday should be recorded. Made Elder Chemezov the best meal he’s ever had, hashbrowns and omelettes for breakfast. One of my wheels on my luggage gave out on the way to Novokuznetskaya. I ripped off the outer rubber and so it’s passable for now. Elder Burgess and Gavrilov came back from Kazakhstan, still haven’t heard from them about Maksim, Yegor, or Vitali… but I’ll call them up one of these days to get the updates.


I, in accordance with that prompting and phone call to President a couple of weeks back, am now serving with Elder Earl in Dolgoprudny (long pond). I’m junior companion, but I’ll be showing him the ropes, doing a little training for him for the next few days (maybe weeks).


He’s an interesting guy, not high on self confidence, and very very self conscious. Loves to read, loved scouts back home. He’s from Pennsylvania, but went to Dixie for a year before coming out. He’s two transfers younger than me, but has a lot of trouble with the language and has been riding junior up till now. Our area is crap at the moment, to be honest. But it’ll all be good.


I asked him to give me a blessing of strength to start out the transfer. AFter 5 or 10 minutes of him preparing himself in the other room, and me unpacking some more stuff, he came in and gave me a very simple blessing. It was the first time on his mission that he’s given a priesthood blessing and I’m thankful for the inspiration to ask him for it. The Lord really seems to be actively interested in the welfare of this Elder and He has chosen me to be the means of some of it.


We ride the elektrishka now, the commuter train, to Lobnya (3rd stop from us away from Moscow) to get to church. It’s in a house for the time being, with 15-25 attendance usually.


We had a ‘game night’ at the house last night. Played with some youth and English clubbers and investigators. Uno and mafia and caught a 9:something train back. We’ll have to leave earlier from now on.


Met our landlady, way nice lady. Planned and had sports night. Nelly, Stac, and Denis came. Nelly’s way weird, but she’s our investigator, our hip-hop dancing investigator.


Stayed the night to help clean. Hand-stand pushups.


9/21/08
Church… 25 people, way good turn out. But 6 missionaries, 3 from district relief society presidency, 2 who were there for the last time, the branch president’s family (5), and 4 investigators (Nelly, Masha and her two sons Zhenya (4 yrs old) and Artyom (2 yrs old). Feels, somehow, comfortable. Ate the last of the frozen borscht, planned until 7 or 7:30pm, some really good planning. Did some contacting, strolling around Dolgoprudny with Sergei, a single older guy who’s lived here 30 years and thought we were baptists. Taught a slightly drunk man about the plan of salvation and committed him to give our tri-fold to his “believing wife”


9/22/08
P-day, I hate the market in Moscow. Gatorball, wrote home for 120 freaking roubles. FHE with Nelly… never coming into Moscow for P-day again.


9/23/08
Elder Earl is on cloud 9. Good study, bought groceries, made some area book phone calls and unearthed 2 very good potential investigators in the process. Had a woman tell us about how we have to go to Jeruslaem, the HOly Land, to know God and Christ. A drunk “former KGB, FSB” guy who lived through two wars, owns two yachts at the club by our island, but still asked us for 10 roubles as we ended the conversation and walked away. He told me that my teeth are plastic and that he could take them out himself if he wanted.


Nasty lunch, found this money store, “Fix Price”, where everything is 35 roubles, and it’s full of American dollar store stuff. Got a syrup dispenser, mixing bowl, tape, cactus lime juic (not that good), a ball pump, and vacuum packing bag for clothes, like a poor man’s FoodSaver.


Got a contact from a man named Vasily and met with Marat, a way cool 19 year old kid from Naberezhniy chilny, tatar. He can’t be taught by us any more though, unless he actively pursues it because his family is Muslim and seriously anti-Christian.


Myata tea is money and we found Subway today too!


9/24/08
Former investigators still working through… had my ear talked off by a man who lived in San Francisco and is a film director and script writer. Can you say… about how much he hates the movie he’s working on. 


In the process of acquiring service at a local hospital (Monday we’ll see the head doctor about it). Ate at Subway, which was comparable to American prices, except that they charge 15 roubles for every two little triangles of cheese.


Two contacts and a fig from Vladimir, our only church member. But it was more of a miscommunication, Friday we’ll meet.


Helping Elder Earl learn how to talk to people. He’s still on something of a cloud 9, and I’m helping him to develop some self-discipline as well. Boy does money burn a hole in his pocket! And doesn’t everything always look so tasty.


We pay for the train, from Dolgoprudny to Vodniki (1 stop) or Vodniki to Lobnya (2 stops), even though there are no controls. I’m reminded of a talk Aaron once gave, integrity is what you do when no one else is looking, and I think the Lord is blessing us for that.


9/25/08
Doorbell rang at 7am this morning, our neighbor from downstairs came up. Our EFY music is too loud in the morning, and my jump roping and ‘throwing weights around’ is shaking their ceiling. I said sorry, she asked if I live in this apartment building myself, and then told me she’d call the police the next time it happens! Oh Russian etiquette, so polite and kind :) 


No go on any of our afternoon plans today. District meeting with the Gregories. We’ll have the Lobnya house until Nov 1 now, hoping to move church to the new branch building mid-October. English club and everything last night. Elder Earl had a dream where he was kicking and hissing at this evil cat, and hi hissing woke me up.


9/26/08
Quiet workout, study interrupted by our landlady negotiating with the master who came to measure and give a quote on replacing one of our doors. Crazy Russians. Some former investigator phone calls. Ala is decided to ‘remain free’ when it comes to religion. Some 7th day adventist lady couldn’t understand the significance of the Book of Mormon (had a 13 minute phone call teaching about the restoration of the priesthood and authority to perform the ordinances of the Bible. We had fried rice, courtesy of Elder Earl, and fried egg sandwiches.


Member meeting with Vladimir Kazantsev, the only member in our area, so we’re told. Object lesson about daily scripture study and praying often, using pencils and pencil sharpener. He reads the Book of Mormon every day and prays morning, afternoon, and night. He shared a way cool experience about fasting that he’ll be sharing in his Sacrament meeting talk Sunday.


Then game night, played Uno and mafia and some stupid fruit game. A fair turnout… other elders came to spend the night and head out to Spain. Did Elder Wirthlin’s weird 100 pushup thing and tried the Nordic hamstring lifts. Elders Earl and Barney are in that Spain group, so Wirthlin and I are companions for a few days.


9/27/08
Went to do service in the rain at a babushka’s house, she wasn’t home. Had lunch, noodles and white sauce w/salted tomato & cheese sandwiches. Got over to Anya and Misha’s finally.


This was the year old contact from the area book, and it seems like the Lord has a little hand in it. So I originally called this number from the old contact sheet, looking for a “Pavel” who wanted a ‘Together forever” video, and according to the address, lived in the dorms at MIPT. Someone not named Pavel answers the phone (it was Misha). I introduce myself and ask if he ever received the free film he ordered from the church. He hands the phone to a woman, and she says she wants the movie and all the books we have about Jesus Christ. He name is Anya, and I can tell from her accent and Russian that she’s no native, probably Armenian.


So Elder Wirthlin and I find their place at Dirazhabelnaya, home 10, apartment 76 (the end of the building closer to Vodniki) and we go up. Misha is Anya’s husband, they’re probably mid 40s to early 50s, have 2 sons. One is in Yeraven (Armenia) and the other in 11th grade here with them. The first thing they ask is how we got the phone number, because it’s Misha’s cell. She says that when they lived in Ukraine about a year ago, that there was some TV show at 6am that was put on by a man from California about Christ. She wrote a few emails trying to order his books, but just received a letter in response. She showed us the letter, and it wasn’t our church. Moreover, she didn’t write her own number in that request, much less her husband’s number! They thought we were from that organization, so I explained how we had come about his phone number, that we thought it was for a person named ‘Pavel.’ Instead, a miracle happened. WE gave them ‘Together forever’ and ‘Finding faith in Christ’ and a tri-fold, then agreed to stop by and give the first less early next week. Misha works as a bus driver in Moscow (#361, from the ends of the metros to the north of town). He smokes, but wants to quit, and they drink wine, coffee, and tea. They are a little leary of the Book of Mormon, but the miraculous way we made contact and the spirit should help work those concerns out.


Sports night, fell again, story of my life.


9/28/08
Sunday, church, then Elder Wirthlin caught the 12:44pm to the end, Savyolova, about a 2 hour train ride, to have church with two families that live there. One family of four has been in the church for four years and they introduced and basically taught the other family out there, back in the beginning of this year. That family, also of four, was baptized on my birthday. We came and they turned things over to Elder Wirthlin to lead our sacrament meeting. We sang ‘The Spirit of God’, had the sacrament, and then a bumpy ride through the first lesson, with a lot of off topic questions:
* What music is allowed on Sunday?
* Why do some people more readily accept the gospel than others?
* Why is the tribe of Dan excluded from the 144,000 mentioned in Revelation?
* Does the current prophet speak with God ‘face to face’ like I am now speaking to you?
We ended with a dinner of manti. Nikolai, the dad of the family that have been members for longer, reminded me of Abe Larsen.


On the train home we had a drunk lady of our same age entertain the whole car, as she asked everyone if they had ice cream cones.


9/29/08
Hashbrowns, grassy grassy antidepressant tea. Wrote home, BYU’s sitting 7 and 8 in the polls, Aaron’s a 28 in the ACT land and coming off homecoming.


Had some burgers for lunch and we’re stopping by the 35 rouble store in a few, “Fix Price” right off of Dolgoprudny. Elder Wirthlin talks a lot and it brings out the chatterbox in me.


Picked up some more basketball accessories and a tie or two at the 35 rouble store. FHE on Novokuznetskaya with Denic, Stas (our Korean investigator) and Stas (member of the church, who looks like my cousin, Tyson Vanderwerken). Translated for the Gregorys and for Sister Gregory when she shared a part of the lesson, about preparing for general conference.


Tuesday we’ll hit the office, lunch at the 200 rouble buffet on Mendeleevskaya and either the Kremlin or Tsaritsina for culture night.


9/30/08
Wake me up, September is ending. Saw the new branch building under construction. It’s going to be pretty sweet once it’s finished by the end of this month. Office run after that, and picked up some of the necessities. Culture night began with dinner at the Chinese buffet on Mendeleevskaya, 200 roubles before 3pm and 250 after (we were after). As much as you can stack on one plate, plus a bowl of sorbet for dessert of the same fashion. Then we found out that the Kremlin closes at 5pm, so we went down to the honey fair on Tsaritsina. Tried just about every kind of honey there is, and I bought a half a kilo of thyme, melissa, and mint honey. Elders Lemon and Prete got a little tipsy drinking some honey alcoholic drink (they didn’t know there was alcohol in it before drinking it).


Then Elder Wirthlin and I helped this drunk, totally wasted guy on the train back to Lognya. I’ve got a picture of him on the ground, up against the elektrichka wall, folded in half. There was this lady laughing and taking pictures with her cell phone. We took the bottle of vodka he had with him (totally passed out, obviously), and poured it out and threw it away. Sad to see people in that state, to see how Satan can just degrade people, and bring them down to almost an animal’s level of consciousness and behavior by means of substances like vodka, alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs. And not to mention the girl who walked past us on the electrichka, who wished us a happy holiday, and had wet her pants very visibily.


10/1/08
October baby, some no dice contacting with Elder Wirthlin in Lobnya, ‘you guys from the sect of white shirts or something?’, but a really good meeting with Masha, a young married mother of two, at least that’s what Elder Wirthlin said. I was a little busy entertaining Zhenya and Artyom, her 3 and 5 year old boys, so that she could focus and feel the spirit.


Chicken fajitas and then we visited Sister Soskova, a single elderly woman (58) who has no living relatives (he son died last year). She fed us french toast and some coffee substitute, which was disgusting, super bitter, and pale brown in color. I downed just about all of them so Elder Wirthlin didn’t have to. When we got there, she had left a few pads on the coffee table, so I covered them up with a letter, but she picked up the letter and moved it when she came in with the french toast, not noticing the pads. So, when she left for the gross coffee substitute stuff, we scooped up the pads with the letter and moved them to her side. She saw them when she came back and took care of them. We did the cutting a hole in paper and walking through it as a spiritual thought, she really liked it. We stayed the night in Dolgoprudny.


10/02/08
Met up with Elder Earl and Barney. They’re wasted, so tired, and although Elder Earl is sporting some newly purchased, top of the line spandex garments, he’s having some problems with chafing. We made a banana cream pie as a district for our ZC dessert tomorrow. He’s out right now, and I’m just a writing away and getting some things done around the apartment.


Did some weekly planning, found two more members in our area. One goes to another church and doesn’t want to meet with us and the other is/was a student at MFTI who has never been seen by our branch president.


Finished out the night with English club and finally picked up our monthly train passes. I’ll have to pull off some of September’s MSF now to live, but I think I’ll be alright.


Planned a little bit of a 10 minute first lesson for zone conference on the morrow, just in case president asks us to perform.


10/3/08
Elder Earl is still way-out-of-it tired. Zone conference was way good today. It’s a good thing we prepared a lesson with the one night we had, because President Cranney had us teach it in front of the zone. We taught a member who came to help, and it went really well. The theme of the Zone Conference was “becoming master teachers”. President Cranney gave a really good training / talk using a ton of scriptures referring to examples of how Christ taught and about how those examples can be likened unto us. The verse references & principles are as follow:


Matthew         7:28-29        Having authority
                13:54                In his own country (neighbors, friends)
                28:19-20        Our charge to teach and baptize
Mark                4:2                Parables / stories / examples
                6:30-32        Wilderness (to plan, be with his father)
                6:34                With compassion (have to pray for it)
                8:31                Teach the atonement
Luke                4:32                Word with power
                5:3                From a ship (creativity)
                6:6-8                Using the priesthood & power of discernment
                11:1                Taught how to pray (by example)
                18:18-30        He personalized it (to the rich man)
                19:47                Taught daily
John                8:2                Early in the morning (don’t be afraid to change up study time)
                8:28                Taught what he was taught
                14:26                By the Holy Ghost, promised blessings
                4:6                Even when He was tired
                14:12                He prophesies that we shall perform greater works than He


Some good beef stroganoff on rice to finish off the conference. Came home spiritually and physically filled. Finished up our planning and had game night.


10/4/08
Elder Earl is still wasted from Spain, not sure how much of his physical difficulty is truly legitimate, and how much is the product of his admittedly hypochondriac mindset. Throw in a low level of self confidence, high levels of self-consciousness, and the stress of missionary work and it’s not surprising. But come Monday, I’ve committed him to start running in the mornings.


We made some more phone calls in our former investigator section and the potential investigators sections of the area book. One meeting tomorrow from it and another Monday night. A little more effective than contacting, so far.


Stopped by the infamous Sveta in the market today. She hooked us up with some plov & carrot salad, Korean style. Then we stopped by Maksim and Seva. Maksim was there with his little 18 month old son, and his parents were there too. Seva wasn’t home. His dad is crazy, and proceeded to talk for the better part of an hour. He’s Hari Krishna, but loves Jesus. He sang us a song he ‘wrote’ about Jesus Christ. He wants to do a multi-religion musical group to perform at really high prices to bring Christ’s love to the rich. “What’s 10k euro when compared to the life of God’s son? What’s 100k euro? 500k euro? That’s nothing, not even a sacrifice.” 


The neighbors started complaining about his singing and music was too loud, so he finished the song quietly and wants us to help raise 2 million euro to put together the group, and show, and tour. Forgot to mention, if you haven’t figured it out already, he’s ‘part gypsy.’ The whole flat was covered in Hindu and Hari Krishna posters, beads, and icons. Maksim walked over to his shrine part way through the lesson, lit up some incense and prayed at the shrine for a little while, all while his dad was blabbing away, missing the bottom row of his teeth, save 3. Just before we left, having given Maksim a ‘Together Forever’ film and a copy of the Family proclamation, they showed us the shrine. Among the pictures of 8 legged and 6 armed gods, was the simple picture of Christ on the front of our trifold invitation. Hope to stop by later, without dad. Maksim said to come by again, in a few days, once his parents have left.


Finished off the day with sports night in Lobnya and two scheduled sit down lessons tomorrow. And so the wheels start turning!


10/5/08
Church, Nelly and Stas came, but the train from Dolgoprudny was 20 min off, so they missed sacrament meeting, but made it for sunday school. Then we had a pretty decent ward council, for being the first for most people. Way good dinner to end our fast, baked chicken with boiled potatoes, gravy and stuffing on the side. Vanya didn’t show, we tried to do some tracting off of Khlebnikovo, but Elder Earl’s fear got the best of his bowels and we left in a huff after one building. Only to the have the fear subside once at our station, and realizing we had a meeting in 10 minutes, and we’d have no time to go home, go to the bathroom, and come back. So we waited and met with Artur, a young guy in mid-twenties, who’s from Uzbekistan and is working here. He’s from a muslim culture, but he’s not muslim. His mom’s Catholic, and dad is kind of muslim, but not really. We sat on the iron skeleton of a bench and gave him the Book of Mormon. We’ll meet again Monday and talk more about prayer and finding out about the truthfulness of the book.


Then we went over to President Filimonovs house to do finances, seeing as Elder Earl was just asked to be the branch clerk. I had some trout, cauliflower and beans while Elder Earl and President counted up the fast offerings and tithing.


10/06/08
P-day, good emails this week from everybody but Brandon and Seth. Played some ball. 2x2 and 21 with Elder Wirthlin and Barney. Bought our groceries, had 2 liters of our almost-American milk come out sour! :( Ate some of Sveta’s plov (pretty good, but still sitting behind Vitali’s and Bakhtyor’s) and sewed up the most recent hole in my Dockers carry-on bag. Artur couldn’t meet, but our meeting with Sergei still went down, and what a meeting it was!


Sergei is a math instructor, double-majored in history and math at the university and in the world’s terms, is a very smart guy. He walked us through the thought process he had in coming to believe in Christ and then the extensive study he’s made of the Bible to gain faith in it.


Like Elder Holland talked about in General Conference last session, the Bible has become a battleground and as Elder Earl said after the meeting, we were just had as casualties! He’s a member of “The Church of Jesus Christ”, a protestant group. He basically refuted James 1:5-6 and every “ask and ye shall receive” reference with his own logic. It reminds me of the verse, ‘the wisdom of their wise men shall perish’. He doesn’t even deem the Book of Mormon worthy of reading. Because there is no physical evidence for him to start believing from! And to pray about it? This was the most shocking to me… he said that Moroni’s promise couldn’t be legitimate, because it’s an inner witness, without any outside controls. That an answer from the Holy Ghost could too easily be counterfeited by the devil! Our next lesson is going to touch on faith, and what that means, and we might give him last conference Liahona. Elder Holland’s talk about the Book of Mormon and Bible, and then Elder Oaks talk about testimony and how we acquire that knowledge.


10/7/08
Tomorrow, with Elder Earl’s promise, we are going to start our day with a run! Today, he groped his way to the bathroom while I was saying my personal morning prayers, and the shower was running before my amen. So I’ve just been sticking to bodyweight squats, push-ups, and stretchy band exercises.


Today was interviews with President right after study. Interview day scones from Sister Cranney and a good interview with President. Answered questions pertaining to investigators and helping Elder Earl. Got an Armenian Book of Mormon from Neipp and Woffinden, then the Matrushka back to good ol’ Dolgoprudny. We had ghetto mac with a money fruit salad from Elder Earl. Tracting on the island to end the day, without much success. Talkedto a few teenagers outside one building for a while. I told them a little about the Plan of Salvation, especially about what will happen after death. We exchanged numbers and they’ll call when we can play ball. Sasha (accountant w/scarf & hat), Kirill (did the talking), and Alex (footballer).


10/08/08
Our first day of officially adjusting study to better fit our proselyting. We pushed language study to the end of the day (from 8 to 9pm) and were out the door a little after 10am to do service at Maksim’s place (our new branch mission leader). Elder Barney and I moved wood, threw away a bunch of junk, and cleaned up in the yard while Elder Wirthlin and Earl did cement, mixing and laying for a little driveway for Maksim’s lada. We had some way good shashlik, potatoes, veggie salad, and apple grape juice.


Showered, did some ‘exploring’ around our area, and found a Holiday Inn. We saw the tall building over in the northern part of our area. Walked back to Dolgoprudny station in basically pitch black… around 7:30pm.


Earlier, we stopped by a lady whose door we knocked last night, apologized for coming ‘too late’ (7:40pm). As we were descending, she opened the door and asked us what kind of mission we have. We walked back up the two stories we had come down and started to teach her. An ‘atheist’, like all others, who doesn’t believe. But then, believes when things are hard and aren’t going well. Said she’s too old for it, a ‘modern person’ who’d rather listen to scientists than Christ. Accused us of priestcraft (getting money for brainwashing people) and that she’d rather not choose to believe or not to believe. Sad to hear her being fine without having a mutual relationship with God, and being fine with having a similar relationship with her own son. ‘He only talks to me when he needs something, like I did to my parents and like I do to God.’


10/9/08
Cleaned up our apartment, weekly planning (some of it). Met Vanya today, way cool guy from Moldova with a lot of potential. 16 year old son who’s read almost all the Book of Mormon and likes it and is a wrestler! He’ll be at church on Sunday with a friend!


English club with Elder Burgess, he’s on a zone leader split. Elder Earl made me some flan (not that good, spanish pudding stuff) and I showed him the wonder that is sour cream and jam on bread.


Way funny, I commented on how my hair is getting long, and he mentioned how Elder Price is his barber. I asked how he paid him, he responded, ‘if you knew the scriptures Elder, we learn from Matthew that every time Elder Price cuts my hair, he’s cutting Jesus’s hair.’ Way funny.


Earlier, one of the sales women on the train came into our wagon right before we pulled into Lobnya. She had dreadlocks down to her stomach and less than perfect teeth. She gave her spiel about selling pantyhose of various sorts, and walked past… but much to my surprise, about 30 seconds later, she came back “Elders? You a holy man or something?” “Well, sort of” was all I could manage to get out before she went off about having a Bible, but God doesn’t give her any money. Not even for a dentist and how tomorrow is her birthday and she turns 35 years old but God doesn’t let her make any money. She showed me her Bible, a little tattered, and kept asking why, why, why!? I was just so taken aback that I said, I don’t know why God doesn’t give you money and before I could get anything else out, she picked up her duffel bag w/all of it’s panty hose, and huffed off into the next wagon!


10/10/08
Had a bit of a follow up meeting with Anya and met her nephew and his wife. They’re also interested in learning more and reading the Book of Mormon. Had some of our fruit tea and gave her a Lamb of God video. Elder Earl and Burgess are going over there Monday to meet with the whole family. Planning for the week, phone calls, lunch.


Met up at game night with everybody. Spent night in Lobnya house for Spain flight next day!


10/11/08
Early morning catching a 6 am bus from Lobnya to the airport. Flew out to Spain without delay or problems. Had the omelette on the plane, Elder Baysinger had the pancakes and I got a lot of reading down in the Book of Mormon (in Russian).


Got to the MTC, went through a session at the temple (in my new Russian temple tie). Found out that Elder Lemon is now junior companion to Elder Bunker in my old area on Pervomayskaya, in Sokolniki branch. Neilson is the district leader, with Kulikovsky in Prospekt Mira, apparently that mid-transfer switch was the result of some problems with Elder Lemon. 


Way good session, especially when considering and pondering on Elder Eyring's last priesthood session of April 2008 conference, and how we renew our covenant of the priesthood in the endowment.


We then started watching conference. We got a session in, love it even way more than last time. I’ve really gained an appreciation for the words of the apostles and prophets. Not to mention, I think that going to the temple really helped in spiritually preparing to be taught by the spirit.


10/12/08
Priesthood and sacrament with the rest of the MTC, eating three times a day again. Watched conference again from lunch until dinner. Way good conference this year, finished it off after dinner and on Monday morning. I especially enjoyed priesthood session and Elder Eyring’s talk about priesthood power, magnifying our callings and fulfilling the oath and covenant of the priesthood. Pretty disappointed by the maturity, or lack thereof, of some of our fellow missionaries (and groupmates). Apparently the MTC experience was a “brainwashing” and the last year and a half hasn’t been for some of my fellow MTC group mates what it has been for me. A little disappointed, but what can ya do?


10/13/08
Finished conference, met with President Hill and had the chance to just talk with him. He answered my question about how to express to someone of another Christian denomination how just believing and living like Christ isn’t enough without the priesthood. He gave some very good insight in listening, respecting the opinions and views of others, but then not being hesitant in frankly declaring the truth. Not just an opinion, but the truth and as President Boyd K Packer said, if it’s the truth, I don’t care if I offend them (to paraphrase).


Then he talked about revelation in response to Elder Smith’s question about whether ministers or leaders of other religions receive some form of revelation or not. He talked a lot about the role of the Light of Christ and I am starting to grasp the real importance and power of the light of Christ in guiding the other Christian denominations throughout the apostasy and even today. And a little more insight to what Yuri described as what he thought was the influence of the Holy Ghost before his baptism, which was in reality the Light of Christ.


Got a good email from Aaron today with his ‘senior pictures’, including a ‘balla for life’ with him shirtless, an arm sleeve, two basketballs, one at each end of his extended hands, a bowed head, and the only thing close to bling he owns hanging from his neck (a pocket watch).


Other news from home indicates that the economy is not the hottest at the moment (dropped 1000 points in the Dow since general conference) and I guess that gas prices have been dropping since, as some result or means to try and alleviate or something.


Saw some of the city today, the cathedral and palace at Sol and Opera metro. Bought a sweet t shirt as a souvenir. Didn’t make it to Real Madrid’s stadium to take a tour, but we got back, cleaned up, ate dinner, and are now safely waiting on our flight at the moment in the airport. Unfortunately, putting up with some incredibly immature behavior of idle missionaries (e.g. see incident of passing woman breastfeeding without any sort of cover and the reaction). Just another day or so and we’ll thankfully be back, that is, I’ll gratefully be back to missionary work!


Our tickets, 529 Euro roundtrip. That’s a lot of money for the church to be sending us!


10/14/08
Back… waited a really long time in the office, getting a little frustrated and confused and disappointed with Elder Earl. The Monday meeting with Anya and Misha and co fell through, but he still counted us for having 3 new investigators… including the son whom neither of us have seen. Vanya didn’t show up at conference and Elder Earl failed to call him even once. So I wasn’t in the best of moods, but I can say there is true power in a vocal prayer. I went out to our balcony after shaving, showering, and snacking a little bit. Laid out a plastic bag, knelt down and for the first time in a long time (definitely since I’ve been on my mission) I poured out my heart in prayer, not silent, but out loud. It was while Elder Earl cooked dinner. It really helped and brought some kind of soothing to my soul, almost therapeutic.


We contacted for a few hours, talked to one babushka who goes to the Russian Orthodox church, but doesn’t believe any of it and she got really curious about us. When we told her we were Mormons, she said she only knows one Mormon, and that’s the sexual lifestyle. “What?” I responded, she held up one finger, and in her broken English, said ‘one man’, then extended the other four fingers of her hand “many wife.” We did a little explaining, and she got even more interested. She wants us to meet her 48 year old daughter, Lena, who speak English, and her 31 year old grandson who speaks English as well. A pretty cool, funny, quirky old lady who did a lot of talking with body language and eyes.


Another guy broke out in English in response to Elder Earl’s ‘men-ya za-voot’ accent, although we ‘won’t get him to change religions’, he was a nice guy and gave us his # if we ever need help or anything. It was a reciprocation of a couple who drove him and his wife halfway across Vermont from an abandoned train station to Hanover. Interesting how their one good act was enough to affect me and others years down the road.


10/15/08
Service at Maksim’s again today, our branch mission leader. Last time was cement and clearing debris (branches & wood mostly). Today was plain debris… so wheelbarrow after wheelbarrow we hauled a bunch of cement pylons, old bricks, weeds, and more debris. I got screwed with a homemade wheelbarrow without a tire (just a plastic wheel). So I had to run to get enough momentum so I wouldn’t stick when going in the mud or over gravel. It was fine on asphalt. In fact, I won our 3 man wheelbarrow race against Elder Barney and Earl, as captured by Elder Wirthlin. Had borscht afterwards, not as good as the shashlik, and then some nasty fish tomato salad. The borscht was pretty decent though.


Did some contacting tonight. Had a little talk with Elder Earl about “perfect love casteth out fear” and work and the spirit and faith. Went a little harsh on him, but think he realizes that it’s with the right thing in mind and that it might be just what he needs.


10/16/08
Some good fun contacting today, as Elder Earl seems to have taken to heart some of the things we talked about last night. He came out talking to the first guy he saw, and he’s got flashcards that he plans on taking around with him to learn new words while we have no one to talk to on the streets. It already puts us both in a better mood, when he doesn’t feel the guilt and I don’t feel the burden of speaking with everyone.


Actually accomplished a few of the goals we set. And he owes me 5 snickers because we picked up on the goal Elder Robbins and Parker had to force him to talk. (Have to talk to at least one person on every transport. We adapted it to electrichka ride, or you owe your companion a snickers.


French bread pizza, meeting and little spiritual thought with Vladimir about building on the rock of Christ to prepare for oncoming rains and floods. He has some friends and looking like we might have some meetings in the coming English club. Elders Wirthlin and Barney and I are gonna get BYU students back into the cougar spirit when we get home. Crazy Halloween party in two weeks.


10/17/08
Met a Muslim guy, Kamil, today. We’re going to meet tomorrow and get him a Book of Mormon. Went to the office, planned, and started planning our Halloween party. Anya and Misha cancelled, so we stayed for game night.


Denis has a baptismal date (13 Dec 2008) and we got Stas and Nelly the church website to watch conference, and Elder Earl started a little introduction into church history. He’s way into it.


10/18/08
Met with Kamil and gave him a Book of Mormon. We sat in the cafe Shokoladnitsa and talked about life and about the Book of Mormon. He’s got some kind of shady work (“I explain to people what to do and what not to do”). 


Smoking his super thin Winston Lights, he told us all about how he grew up on a block where at least one member of every family had been in jail at one point in his/her life, and how he used to be of the ‘turn the other cheek’ type, and walked away from situations of humiliation. That is, until a certain situation. He had been working in a factory, loading & unloading trucks. He had not been working very long, when he dropped a box. Everything inside broke. His boss called him into his office and laid into him, verbally, and said he’d be fired without pay. He said he would have walked away, but he made a different choice… he broke his boss’s hand and rib, got his pay, and left. 


A very rough character, from Muslim culture and heritage, but not by faith or action. Wants to meet again after he’s read the Book of Mormon. See if he isn’t ready to change his life!


10/19/08
Stas and Nelly came to church, and both really liked it. We sang a musical number, because I have been given much, and Elder Earl forgot that he had a solo to start the second verse. But it turned out well. The families from Kimri came (2 hours north by electrichka, a 20 dollar ticket). Good missionary meeting with Maksim, our branch mission leader.


Chicken tacos for lunch, checked up on an old contact in the area book, but it was the wrong address. Then we went to Lobnya to the Filimonovs to take care of finances, counted the one tithing envelope, recorded it, and ate some noodles and cutlets. Then home to pay the rent. Met our landlady’s son, Sergey, with his iPhone and ear piercing. Took the train to Moscow to spend the night with Elders Price & Cunningham in Sokolniki. Got haircuts and did some talking. 


Yuri is full out planning on a mission next fall / winter. Hopefully winter, so Elder Price will be there when we go through the temple together!


10/20/08
P-day at the Cranney’s home in Rosinka. Aaron hasn’t followed through with getting Becca on the email forwarding list. He’s got his last shot at the ACT this weekend… hoping for a high 20s, maybe even a crack into the 30s. We’ll see what he thinks about it come Monday and results probably the Monday after that.


Sent some pics home, I hate mac computers, played some tennis, and I taught Elder Earl how to play racquetball. Also went over an athletic stance for him, about keeping your knees bent, weight on the balls of your feet and shoulders square. He’s got a ways to go before he’ll be athletic, but we’re working with him. FHE on Novokuznetskaya, sick of trying to work with a 20 year old girl (still teenager personality) investigator. We’ll pass Nelly at district conference on Saturday to the Rechnoy sisters.


10/21/08
My watch battery died, and so after we dropped my summer shoes off at the shoe shop on the island (to have them ‘winterized’, that is, to repair the cracked soles), we went down to the station to buy a new battery. It was a difficult choice, with the Chinese 1 year, 10 rouble battery winning out the Japanese 2 year 50 rouble battery. When the manager found out we’re here as missionaries, he gave it to me for free!? Way nice guy, he’s also selling watches for 100 roubles, might pick one up sometime.


Finally got our first lesson with Anya, Misha, and Artyom, the Armenian family. 2 or three times they had to cancel, but we finally got over there. We watched ‘Together Forever’, which is pretty cheesy, but all right. Anya loved it. Then Finding Faith in Christ, which Misha really liked, and then Lamb of God. We’ll never give that out again, better stick with Finding Faith in Christ! All together over tea and khalva and little candies.


Then we taught a solid first lesson, using cups to show Christ’s church on the foundation of apostles and prophets, and how the death of the apostles left the church in ruins.


Gave them a Book of Mormon in Armenian and the commitment to read and pray. Anya was really excited about how we described that we’re going to teach something called the Plan of Salvation, about where we came from and where we are going after death.


Misha thought Ammon is older than Dad from our family photo! I’ll have to let him know.


Nerf gun battle when we got home to celebrate, and I’ve started to learn how to read music.


10/22/08
Mad Sergey hung up on us, Artur had to cancel because of problems at work (his registration expired) and so we were left with a whole lot of time to think about our lesson with bible Sergey. Had our tea in his ridiculously hot living room. We read 3 Nephi 11 together, but he still wasn’t letting the spirit touch him. Said he needed a foundation upon which he could build his faith or believe… like the physical evidence of the bible, the multiple witnesses of the gospels, the miracles the disciples performed. To him, the witnesses of the 8 and 3 doesn’t count, because so many of them left the church, and although they never denied their witnesses, they can’t be considered trustworthy if they left the church. And so he continues to refuse studying it or to pray about it.


We came to the conclusion that he doesn’t have the broken heart or contrite spirit, or even ‘no more than desire’ to read, much less pray about or accept the Book of Mormon. So it’s better to drop him to the former investigators category.


10/23/08
A little contacting, lunch and district meeting at the Gregories in Moscow (off of Sokol or October fields metro stops). Potatoes and gravy, district meeting about finding with faith. Elder Earl got a little sick, but we went to English Club, but Elder Wirthlin and I took all the English club.


Nelly really gets irked by Elder Wirthlin, and she talks so loud on the electrichka that everybody can hear her half-Russian, half-English complaining and whining.


10/24/08
Elder Earl woke up sick still, so we didn’t go running (lucky dog). Had some cinnamon pancakes and let him sleep while I studied. I’m on pace to finish the pentateuch (first 5 books of the Bible) by transfer, and then the rest of the Bible should come more easily. Also on pace to finish the Book of Mormon by Thanksgiving (in Russian).


Weekly planning, let out a little in companionship inventory as concerning Elder Earl’s heart and desire and faith in the work.


Sold a Book of Mormon to a communist guy, Nikolai, over 60 years old who never believed in God and doesn’t plan on it. He wouldn’t take it as a gift, so I named a price (5 roubles), and he took out a 100 rouble note and stuck it in my hand. I threw in the ‘Testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith’ pamphlet and trifold. Walking away, Elder Earl informed me that I’d broken Russian law, because we’re not licensed to sell our materials. Oh well, those 100 roubles will go to the Book of Mormon fund next time I pay fast offerings!


10/25/08
Brandon’s birthday, kind of didn’t realize it, but Monday I’ll let him know. Came in to the Saturday session of District Conference with Stas. Unfortunately, the turn out was about what one would expect for Russia Moscow on Saturday at noon. I personally was a little disappointed in the turn out and the quality of the talks. As Stas said, besides President Cranney’s talk, all of them were ‘not about anything.’ President Podsablaev isn’t exactly the most gifted public speaker, and President Nichipirov doesn’t come across as the most caring, involved person (kind of like, a talk from a member of higher status to the masses, is how it felt). The transmission from Salt Lake on Sunday should bring a lot bigger turnout and be a lot more interesting for Stas, and Nelly if she shows up.


Ate at McDonald’s with Stas afterwards (61 roubles for a Big Mac, 55 roubles for french fries). Then took the 400 from Rechnoy Vokzol to Zelenograd. Met up at the theater and watched ourselves a pretty amateur ballet. Swan Lake, pretty boring, but whatever.


While we were waiting for the office elders on some street corner, to walk home and stay the night at their place, President Cranney gave us a ring. I’ll be shotgunning Lobnya coming this Friday (two new missionaries into an area), with Elder Earl getting a new companion here in Dolgoprudny to work with Anya and Misha, Artur, Kamil, Stas, Marat, Vanya, Maksim and Seva, and the rest of our investigators.


Elder Barney and Wirthlin are both out, so we’ll see what more is in store come the rest of transfer calls and actual transfers Friday.


I’ll be working with Miasha, Denis, and the families up north in Khimri, and I’ll have that stupid house to deal with (bugs, spiders, cockroaches, and mosquitos galore). Plus moving all of the church’s stuff to the new branch building once it’s remodeled (part way through November it should be). I’m stunned, and so are the rest of our district members… I just hope Elder Earl has been coherent enough over the last 5 or 6 weeks to know what’s going on and to be able to really lead out in helping people in our area to progress. Not so sure about his competency, but whom the Lord calls, the Lord qualifies… it’s just a question of whether he believes that himself.


10/26/08
Time changed today and we forgot… and so we shorted ourselves an hour of sleep at the office elders apartment. Went to the broadcast, Stas and Nelly were early too (they also forgot about the time change) and they barely made it through the hour and a half. They bounced to see a movie at President Monson’s ‘Amen’, but I think Nelly liked it.


10/27/08
Found out that Seth and Elizabeth are expecting! No big worries though, I’ll be home before the little turd is born.


Spent P-day in Lobnya, helping Elder Earl with the peanut / whale / what eventually ended up as a witch pinata. Came into Moscow for the FHE on Novokuznetskaya, but Stas and Nelly couldn’t make it from Rechnoy Vokzol, because the metro stopped up there on the green line. They forced everyone out onto the street, because someone fell onto the tracks at Voykovskaya. I tied my record for people touching me at one time in the metro (7 on two separate occasions), and we just kind of hung out on Novokuznetskaya at the FHE.


10/28/08
Packed for moving to Lobnya, and we finally made it out to Severnaya to do some tracting. Caught the little 572 bus a little ways off of the Dolgoprudny station and walked around the big buildings there at the North Region. Just north of the gray line, I suggested tracting, Elder Earl just about wet himself, ‘let’s go contacting’ he said ‘and who are we going to talk to?’ I replied. “With people”, “there are none” I told him. Really only babushki and dedushki outside there, so I dragged him into the first open stairwell we found. The first door opened and a guy was holding back his dog, it was about ready to go to town on us! Barking, biting the air, I just gave him a tri-fold (he said he couldn’t hold the dog much longer) and he closed the door.


Later, about the second or first floor, an old man let us in and we talked to his wfie for a little while, just inside the door. She’s Russian Orthodox, but told us how her kids don’t believe, and that she’s just done with life. She said, ‘last night I was trying to die, trying to die, but I just couldn’t die!’ Really sick lady, her legs were all swollen, couldn’t see or hear very well. We just chatted with her for a while, told her about the resurrection, and then left.


Next stairwell, he was even more terrified. It was 4 stories taller. Only on the last floor did anyone let us talk to them (besides the Armenian girls smoking in the stairway on the 5th floor, and that was about English club). A contact from a younger guy named Nikita and the last door a woman in her 30s in her robe talked to us for a little while. Basically she barely took the ‘Together Forever’ pass a long card, saying ‘I won’t promise’ a few times. She goes to church at Trinity (an Orthodox temple nearby) and one of the priests even winks at her. Weird lady, kind of flirty, and so we just got out of there. Elder Earl was just in shock, so stunned that we were tracting.


10/29/08
Did a little bit of contacting after study, went shopping at Fix Price for the Halloween party with the other Elders and Lera. Decorated, got set up for Thursday’s party. She and Earl made the peanut pinata a witch, and we did all sorts of bows, lights, pumpkins, spider webs, and all that. Tried to stop by Anya and Misha and give Artyom a tie for his birthday, but that didn’t quite work out. They were in Moscow, we contacted home, and took some sweet pictures at the amphitheater across the canal from us. Our only companionship photos, that I know of.


10/30/08
Full study, to the office to get the Halloween mix Elder Knuth made.


Back in time to get my last bags over to Lobnya. Ran and got watermelons (pumpkins = too expensive), donuts (28 rubles a pop!) and other stuff for the party. Got back, set about getting the food ready, final preparations, got our customers. Elder Wirthlin -> the Flash, Elder Barney -> old time golfer, me -> Julius Caesar, Elder Earl -> a hairy thing with his claw gloves and fur lined coat worn inside out.


We had a doctor, a priest, a family of pumpkins, a couple of witches, a pirate or two, a hippie / rockstar, a couple of romans under my reign, the Joker, and not so sure what Elder Prete was (captain underpants or something).


Way fun party, I got slaughtered in the eating a donut off a string contest, mummy wrap, pin the nose on the pumpkin, limbo, dance contest, bobbing for apples. Earl, Stas (member Stas) and I were the only ones past 1st grade who participated in the dance competition, and only on “Thriller.” Monster Mash went hands down to President Filimonov and son for his routine. He ain’t scurred to dance.


Finished the night with the pinata and then a big picture. After that, it was the “Withlin Show”, starring Elder Wirthlin and all-eyes-on-me antics. Calling Elder Earl out to do handstand pushups, doing backflips and all sorts of making fun of others. Just a bit of confirmation of what Stas (not a member) said, “The kind of feeling, that he came on his mission to vacation”. Members and others notice when you’re genuine and when you’re not (see English clubbers in Kazakhstan and Elder Watkins, and people here and Elder Wirthlin).


Everybody left, we cleaned up just a bit before writing in journals and going to bed!


10/31/08 - Lobnya: Timur Kodirov
Transfers! Went in early and thanks to Elder Earl, who actually did some snooping in the office, can’t believe it, he’s ridiculous, I already knew that Elder Kodirov would be my companion. I convinced him to keep his mouth shut to everybody else, but somehow managed to give Elder Wirthlin a hint before he told me.


Big transfer this time, Barney went into the office as a threesome, Price out to Nizhni, Elder Parker gets his final request (to train) and Elder Wirthlin is back in Sokolniki. Angelo is with Earl, so we’ll have to keep a good eye on those two (not exactly the companionship most inclined to work their hardest). Pizza Hut, a little cleaning, game night, Otboi.


11/1/08
Spent a little time contacting, going through the park and talking to ladies with babies. Drunk guy “Do you have questions? And you, do you have questions?” turning back and forth to each of us.


Did some serious cleaning. The little side room to the sacrament room, the kitchen, and the big bathroom, and the little member bathroom (scrape the toilets baby!) and then took a little time in the area book.


Got things ready for the Sabbath.


11/2/08
The recent convert family from Khimri came down today, got in about 20 after 8. We taught them about the commandments, as we’re going through the new member lessons. It was a really good lesson, the first for Elder Kodirov and me together. 21 people at church, Masha didn’t make it and neither did Denix, but Stas and Nelly came and Stas in a white shirt and vest nonetheless! President Filimonov noticed how well we cleaned up, and we can already see how much more appreciative he was. It’s a step in the right direction in gaining the trust of our branch president and members. Show #1 that we take care of the place we live and #2 that we take care of the place we worship our Lord and where we renew our covenants with Him.


After church we cleaned up a little more, mostly me unpacking, and then we did our weekly planning and headed out for some tracting.


In Rostov, tracting is the main method of finding, as opposed to street contacting in our mission. And so, Elder Kodirov started our tracting notebook, where we record what response we get at every door. Who is home or not, who says ‘never come back’, etc. We had some funny responses today, some really awkward people, one 83 year old man, way cool guy, Pyotr who just doesn’t believe in God, but hopes for life after death. A former soldier who came out into the elevator room to tell us about how he became a lieutenant at 19, and commanded and fed 1700 men.


After having the cops threatened on us, we left (we want to avoid any and every problem with the law if we can) and worked a little on the area book. Earned our p-day!


11/3/08
Loving working out in a house, where I can do pushups and jump rope and throw my dumbbells around in the morning.


Good study, wrote home. Aaron’s got my FB login, name, and password now. And so after a transfer, he should come through this next week. Stephanie’s reception in Boise was this weekend with all sorts of people I’d completely forgotten about. Mrs. Stillwaugh, 3rd grade teacher. Sister Meunier from the 7th ward Meridian East Stake, where we lived. Crazy stuff. Made borscht and stroganoff… it didn’t turn out all that hot, but what can you do?


Meeting with Sister Soskova about missionary work. She’s so lonely, she’s got a dream interpretation book and Elder Kodirov said that the icons on her table are set up in the fashion that people pray to. She’s got some old traditions that are difficult to let go of.


Almost got Hark the Herald Angels down today! Harmonica baby, Christmas branch party here I come!


11/04/08
A little office run, back in time to say “Hi” to Stas and Elder Angelo and Earl as they finished up a Plan of Salvation lesson with him.


We ate borscht and stroganoff, and went over to Tamara’s. She met us outside the building and we walked over to her friend’s place. Aleksandra, the babushka, and Nadezhda, her daughter / granddaughter (not quite clear which). They fed us borscht, then potatoes and some salads, all pretty good. They piled a bunch of fish on my plate and had to politely decline, it didn’t look exactly the most appetizing. They invited one more friend, Viktor, a moustached little plump guy. He started into us about pork, it’s unclean meat supposedly. We went into the other room, Elder Kodirov read 3 Nephi 11 to them. Tamara’s the only one with an open heart and mind. Babushka Sasha (Aleksandra) gave the closing prayer (they always stand to pray) and she gave at least an 8 minute prayer… and the things she said! And her daughter started throwing in her little ‘Amens’ in the middle and what not. Felt like she wasn’t praying to God, more like she had her eyes open (I didn’t dare peak, in case they were and she was just ranting to us. She went on about how they’ll never accept the Book of Mormon because it’s not the Bible, and how she can talk about Jesus for days, and this one time she did and everybody else fell asleep, but she kept on going. Basically, I was a little offended at first (tearing our religion apart, in a so-called prayer). But by 5 minutes in, it was just so comical I was doing my best to keep from bursting out laughing.


Tamara told us about a dream she had, going up a wooden staircase, with people all around her and coming to the top and nothing above or to the sides, but sky. She’s not sure if it means she’s “arrived” or if she’s in a dead end. We had a good talk/lesson as we walked her home, gave Mosiah 2-5 to read and commitment to pray. We both gave powerful promises about the answer she’ll receive. She really is seeking for the spirit and the truth. Then we literally ran home, since it was 9:35pm.


11/05/08
Good meeting with Masha and Maksim, our branch mission leader was there. She wants to be baptized, but she wants her husband to be baptized with her. She said that she doesn’t want to be the only one out of her family in the church. Her husband, Dima, has had family members fall in with some of the more radical groups (like Jehovah’s Witnesses and some other group called “the white brotherhood”), so he’s pretty skeptical. But she says that he listens to his “inner voice” better than she does, and she thinks that if she could just bring him to English club, then he would see that it’s a good place and then we could start working with him. It was a good meeting, good for her to just talk and get some stress out and some things off her chest.


Tracted in the evening, ran into some nice babushki, some angry babushki, and a lot of uninterested others. Coming home way tired of late, but we’re getting through things.


11/06/08
District meeting about the importance of getting investigators to sacrament meeting. Plov and Elder Kodirov’s apple pie for lunch. Meeting with Denis, he has a Dec 13 baptismal date and yeah, no way is it happening. He hasn’t been preparing at all (his own words). He hasn’t been reading, couldn’t answer the questions:
* What does baptism mean to you?
* How do you understand repentance?


So we re-committed him to read and pray about the Book of Mormon to get his own personal testimony. English club, eh… just winging it, not that hot.


11/07/08
Just one of those bad, no good, horrible days. Got ready for our “FHE on Fridays” kick off. Our twist to make game night an activity worth doing. A pretty good turn out, Korean Stas, Anya, Lera, Sister Soskova, Nelly, Masha, Denis, Stas (member), Artyom, Zhenya, and the other missionaries. I played with Artyom and Zhenya the whole time, just because I wasn’t feeling up to par. Elder Kodirov had a little trouble, because people weren’t exactly as attentive to his lesson as he would have liked. That’s going to be one thing he’ll learn on his mission, how to deal with those kind of people without offending them. It made him mad, but we had a good talk and I think it helped him out. He really likes to talk out his feelings and share. I feel like I’ll be playing, some extent or another, the role of psychologist this transfer. Forgot, at the ned of the game, Elder Angelo prayed to bless the refreshments, Artyom and Zhenya and I were pretending to be on a train and the metro… but when I saw the prayer, I told them to pray with us, and they folded their arms, bowed their little heads and closed their eyes. Artyom with the biggest grin ever, and they even said ‘Amen!’ at the end of the prayer! That was a special little moment before they tore off after the candies and lemonade.


11/8/08
We went to Joy’s baptism today. Unfortunately, neither Denis nor Greg could make it. It was great to see her so happy the whole time, and great support from the branch.


Elder Chemezov messed up the words 4 or 5 times (kept dropping out ‘of’s and ‘and’s). I said the closing prayer, way strong spirit, as always is at baptisms. Even more so when you aren’t the one organizing and worrying about making sure things are ready. Joy’s going to do great and it’ll be exciting to hear how her family will join. Her husband and 4 Aaronic priesthood aged sons.


In the evening, we met with Tamara, the 7th day adventist. We went with Stas Senator (family by Pavlenka) and she fed us and we had time for a small lesson about the Atonement, light of Christ, gift of the HOly Ghost, and the priesthood. We deemed them ‘God’s helpers. WE gave her a blessing and she described that as I anointed her with oil, that she saw a ‘vision’ with Christ standing at the end of a tunnel with beams of light emanating from him. She’s going to pray about the Book of Mormon more and she really does want an answer. Elder Kodirov asked her if she believed, and she quoted the Bible “help thou my unbelief”. But she seems totally different on the phone or when we’re not talking with the strong presence of the spirit. We got home late.


11/9/08
Cleaned from my waking moment till the Sulat family arrived from Khimri and walked in the door, and even then some to get the dishes done after they had arrived. Held a mini lesson about some of the commandments. Denis and Masha didn’t make it to church, 2nd week in a row :( but Stas did and Nelly too!


Evening meeting with Sister Larisa Soskova. She’s the grandma for the missionaries here in Lobnya. We had vinegar salad and gave her a good lesson about the spirit in missionary work. What especially touched her was the section about “praying with faith”, DC 42:14, in order to get the spirit. She prayed at the end, with her eyes open (... weird) but it was a real prayer, her first in a while, as she put it in her prayer. It really did lift her spirits!


Maxwel called right before we went over there. The Ghana shirt he promised me is being worked on right now. So cool. He got my tie and said he loves it. Was way cool to hear from him. Said that President Rust of the international branch was released today and Brother Meservy was called as the new branch president! Interesting, very interesting.


11/10/08
Aaron still hasn’t pulled through in getting Rebecca’s address. Stephanie’s married, BYU and Utah on course for a holy war with BCS bowl implications.


Shopping until 3pm (looking for a beanie and a sweater), time for grechka (buckwheat) and then hopped on down to Dolgoprudny to meet up before FHE on Novokuznetskaya. Stas, Nelly, and Anya all came (along with Stac the member and Lera). Memorized articles of faith as the lesson, got home way late. Basically, like Elder Kodirov and I decided, it was a waste of our night, of the Lord’s time for us, specifically, to go down.


We talked about the tendency in our mission to not forget yourself and go to work. The tendency to label obedient missionaries as ‘squares’, ‘holier than thou’ and what not. Like Elder Berlin said, or I overheard Elder Lemon, “I hope he breaks him”. Our group - at least Lemon, Jensen, and Berlin - look at the MTC as a brainwashing… and that’s why Spain has been disappointing to see how the MTC wasn’t a platform to take off from, but the cliff to be pushed off of (or to jump off of). It’s sad… but luckily, we’re in a companionship where we can talk about this kind of stuff.


Be obedient has been replaced with be human. And no one takes it seriously, nor the use of the Lord’s time seriously.


11/11/08
Meeting with Misha and Maksim here with us. We taught about the difference between the influence and the gift of the Holy Ghost and the light of Christ. Also talked about obedience and commandments in a general sense.


Watched the life of Thomas S. Monsoon during lunch, and was really touched by the story when, as a bishop, he felt a prompting during a stake leadership meeting that he should go to a veteran’s hospital that one of his ward members had been admitted to. He couldn’t just stand up and leave in the middle of the stake president’s talk. He waited it out and then ran out (before the prayer) to his car, and ran the whole corridor at the hospital. He was met by a nurse, “ARe you Bishop Monson?”, “Yes”, I’m sorry, the patient was asking for you right before he died”. He made the decision from then on that he would follow the promptings of the spirit, no matter the circumstances. If the Lord has an errand, Tom Monson is ready to do it!


Contacted the rest of the day, sun set around 4:15pm, moon up by 5pm. Helped an old man with a sailor’s mouth clear brush around his little garden.


An old man and his wife basically chewed me out for being from a country that actually gives people retirement benefits and pensions. No idea how to respond to that… I just wish my accent wasn’t so noticeable. One thing is that if I come right in after Elder Kodirov has said something, anyone can pick up on that difference right away!


Found a stadium of American high school caliber, but it’s a little ways away. Talked to a writer who wants us to help him get his novel published. He knows when the end of the world is coming… in 3 years… hahah. He was crazy weird.


Came home a little early (no light on the street), to work on our zone conference homework. An 88 word story about the church, blah blah blah, and for Elder Kodirov to prepare for the mission prep class on Wednesday.


FINISHED THE BOOK OF MORMON IN RUSSIAN.


11/12/08
Took care of some garments left behind, set another goal… to finish the Old Testament by next Spain visa trip (Jan 12 is the expiration date of my current visa), which gives me two months from today. I just finished 1 Samuel, so at a rate of 13 pages a day, I can do it. I’ll have to make another paper like my BOM Russian reading one to help push me.


Did some contacting behind our place in a quiet little dacha part of town. Found out / realized today that the roads I walk everyday here are 67 years removed from the stand Russian troops made to stop Nazi troops. The place is covered in little monuments. 67 years ago the streets were littered with bodies, bullets, and blasts of Russian forces that kept Germany from taking Moscow.


Baked potatoes and taco seasoning were two new treats for Elder Kodirov today, and we’ll get a nice lesson in mission prep tonight at the Central building. We better, with the amount of time and worry he’s putting into it!


Zone conference tomorrow, will get some peanut butter from Sister Cranney, woo hoo!


11/13/08
Spent the night with Elders Burgess and Neipp, Zone Leaders, at Sokol. Their apartment’s got more ‘friends’ than we do! (cockroaches that is).


Zone conference was half English, half Russian, so I was translating for Elder Kodirov a decent amount of time. The zone leaders talked about unity amongst missionaries and how to combat the forces that drive the spirit out of our companionships. We talked about looking at the positives, and talking about the positives. Splits are not the time to vent, but the time to rave about a companion’s strengths. And maybe with a little humor, bring out the problems and work towards a resolution.


The APs talked about the 2000 stripling warriors and the army of Antiparah attacking the Lamanites from both sides. We’re the 2000 and the church members are Antiparah’s forces. The Lamanites have stopped chasing us and have given battle to the church members. Now it is our responsibility to go back, help inspire and show an example to the members in how to fight those forces of Satan!


President Cranney said thank you, added his testimony to the trainings and read a part from War & Peace, talking about the “Spirit of the Army.” 


Sister Cranney talked about gratitude and its importance, especially with Thanksgiving coming up!


We did some contacting amongst the dachas when we got hom, got a really good contact from a man named Aleksandr, early 30s I’d say, who said he was atheist at first. As he walked away, Elder Kodirov asked if there was a certain reason why? He turned around, already 15 meters past us, and came back, talking about the unfairness of life. He isn’t atheist, we come to find out, he’s a great guy who’s working as a PE teacher in two elementary schools despite a university diploma. He’s been married 12 years and they still haven’t been able to have children. A really good guy, and it looks hopeful to teach and talk with him and his wife.


Good English club, I sang “should ye feel inclined to censure” and read Matthew 18:21-22 as a spiritual thought. A boy, 19, named Ilya came for the first time tonight. He got our number from calling the numbers Sergey Nikolaevin Kazachinsky of the Sokolniki ward gave him, the former  branch mission leader over there. We had an adapted 1st lesson with him, helping him to start believing in God and in Christ as a real person, not as an abstract idea symbolized by the story of Christ. Along the lines of the book “Ishmael” and the premise that the fall of Adam and Eve was no literal event, but a representation of the agricultural revolution.


Kind of weird, he explained that he has problems with energy and trepidations, which can be manifested in uncontrollable smiling and laughing at the most inappropriate of times. He has somewhat of a deformed right hand and his religious knowledge is of the most basic in nature. But he’s got an open mind, heart (we hope) and ears (that’s for sure)


11/14/08
I don’t think I recorded an encounter Elder Kodirov and I had last week. We met a soldier, a man who’s been through two wars (Chechnya and Afghanistan), who’s had a rough life (parents died before he reached 18, problems in his amrriage, had just bought a beer because he was remembering his friend, who should have turned 35 the day before, but didn’t make it. He kept asking why God didn’t help him. He said to prove that God exists by our words. Explained that God already gave his son, willingly. He said that that’s all made up about Jesus Christ, no faith… really sad.


Today we stopped a man who sat in jail, unjustly convicted, for 23 years, to be let out just a little while ago once they discovered it wasn’t him. “Where was God?” he angrily asked us, he prayed the whole time. I honestly had nothing to say, but it didn’t matter, because he was already on his way.


Weekly planning, our Friday night FHE/game night. Trust in God spiritual thought with the 2 cups and choose the 3rd. Popcorn, UNO, and that’s all.


11/15/08
Spent the whole day finding… contacting and a good evening tracting by Stadium Moscvich. Met Natalya, mother of 4 kids whose mom is a member (they even came to her baptism). And Artyom, a really great young father of 1, a son he just recently baptized into the Russian Orthodox church. We gave him the Book of Mormon and he said we could call periodically to check up on his reading and that in a month he should be able to read it.


In one building, we had an older man answer and kindly decline us. We made it to two other doors on the floor before their door swung open and a lady jumped out. She looked at us, and we turned, expecting a Liahona story, you know “I was on my knees praying when my husband answered the door. When he came back, I asked who it was and he told me ‘some kids from the Church of Jesus Christ’ and it was an answer to my prayer!”  But no, the first word out of her mouth were “Cult! Cult!” and she went nutso on us. So we beat it. Couple of other nice people who talked ot us, but nothing too special.


11/16/08
Lesson with the Sulimoviy family about family history and temple work. Gave them pedigree charts, Dasha was in a really good mood. Sister Sulimoviy gave a talk, they’re having some rough times right now, she’s expecting their 3rd child and they’re doing a remodel, so we’ll be going up for FHE next Monday (the long train ride north).


Met Lyubov and Vladimir tonight. Good Christian people, but won’t open the Book of Mormon. Things are kind of in their court at the moment.


Missed our meeting with Ivan because we talked too late and he came too early. We were at Lyuba’s when he texted us. I’m pretty mad about that, but the Lord blessed us with a few good contacts and calmed me down a bit.


11/17/08
Aaron got a 30 on his 3rd time around, so he’ll be kickin it with me at the Y come next fall. Intramurals, taking me out to lunch & breakfast with that Dining Plus, the works.


Dad’s still writing about the 2nd coming and Amanda’s still writing (she got her ‘personal progress’).


Did a money journal entry for Elder Earl, listened to conference, and had family home evening with Larisa Soskova to finish out the day.


11/18/08
Just about killed myself, trying to get the hang of this handstand pushup thing. Way cold day, snowy. All of 10 people on the street, 7 of them babushki. Meeting with Tamara, watched Elder Hales and Scott from October 2009 about revelation and finding truth. We’re going to fast with her this Saturday to Sunday. Fed us again, Stas was with us again, talked too long, again!


11/19/08
Met with Masha today, we taught the first lesson with a major focus on prophets. Not too hot of a lesson, because we weren’t exactly in unity. 


We did service at Maksims, and I made Elder Kodirov pancakes.


Ilya called, cancelled our night meeting and said that he’ll not be coming anymore. When I asked, “What happened?”, all he could say was “I don’t know” He did ask at the end though, “I can reach out to you if I change my mind though?” Interesting, very interesting. Someone probably told him how we’re a sect that steals your apartment and turns you into a zombie. The snow started today, who knows when it will stop!


11/20/08
District meeting about finding through church activities. Too bad we don’t have any luaus in Russia… which bring a higher attendance than our who Eastern Europe Area conference meeting (2 districts worth).


The APs, Elder Govrilov and Randall, graced us with their presence, along with the Gregories. And everyone managed to hang around for some of Elder Kodirov’s plov. Good stuff with the right heat!


English club, we made snowmen to welcome everyone, got some good pictures of it, I hope. Good English club, new girl (Lena) and the hurricanes (Artyom and Zhenya) kept it fairly under control with their bags of peanuts.


11/21/08
Interviews! Well, it has come, talked to president today about going home things. The 30th of May, 2009 is going to be my flight back home. Giving me 6 months from next Sunday. Crazy, because Elder Angelo, in our district, is one transfer older than me (he was the older group in the MTC) and he’s got 3 months as of last week. The visa issue is still having an effect, up until my group is gone, President Cranney told me today about the new compliment of 36 Elders and 12 Sisters for the mission. 22 North American, some number of western Europeans, Ukranians, and native Russians. So Elder PRice won’t be dying by himself after all.


Had way too many scones from Sister Cranney, but I liked them anyway. Helped Elder Berrett pick up his mini-missionary at Yaroslavsky Vokzal and fell in the train break at Timryazvskaya, so we walked around the market right of the station and got a beanie with a bill for winter and a sweater that matches. Picked up some insoles (cold-weather) to keep the feet warm this winter. Finished out with FHE with the usual people.


11/22/08
Some good contacting in the snow. Met with our new landlady. Got the keys for and signed the contract on our new apartment. On the 24th, Monday, the apartment is ours. We’ve got the house till the 1st, so we’ll move in gradually.


Took a while to talk things over with our landlady. Got through, did some tracting, ran into a government official for Lobnya who works with religious organizations. Gave her a Book of Mormon and she informed us that we need to make sure that the city knows about our building move. Ran into a potential family on the way, Boris and his wife and baby. He’s young, but Elder Kodirov recognized a tattoo on his hand and so we know he’s been in jail before. We’ll see what turns out!


Finished weekly planning and I finally got up to a handstand against the wall. Steadily making my way to pushups by the time we’re out of this house!


11/28/08
Woke up at 6:30 again this morning. What a surprise. Fasting for Tamara, so no breakfast to make and what’s better, no dishes to wash from it! Got everything tidied up well enough and set up the chairs and sacrament table in preparation for our last sacrament meeting in the Lobnya house. Around 8:20am got our usual knock at the door. The Sulimoviy family, minus mom (in the hospital with problems related to her pregnancy), plus Brother Nikolai Kharlamov with his 16 year old son, Vladimir.


Looked over my talk the last time, we didn’t teach the family the lesson we planned because we want mom (Galina) to be there too when we teach it.


Gave my talk, turned out pretty well. About the end of the 13th article of faith, the question I asked, “What are we striving for?” Matthew 6:33, Matthew 22:37-40, Mosiah 2:17, Jacob 2:18-19, Malachi 3:10, Elder Oaks talk “Good, Better, Best” from Oct 2007. 


Elder Kodirov led the Sunday School lesson. Sister Larisa Soskova brought a friend. We might meet with her, if she comes to church next week, like she said. Overall, a good last sendoff for the house.


We ended our fast, boxed up and got things ready for the move and then put in our personal study.


Tracted for a few hours, in our favorite rundown, ‘intellectual’ area of town and in one of the buildings in our block. Limited success. We’re going to start approaching doors with a little more creativity from now on. Returned by 8pm for language study, the last hour of the day. PResident Cranney has cracked down, we’ve got 1.5 hours for lunch now and only 30 minutes for language study, with the exception of new missionaries, and in our case, because he really feels prompted that Elder Kodirov needs to learn English here on his mission.


11/24/08
Moving guys showed up, we sent pretty much all the church stuff over, except some boxes and some books / manuals.


Wrote home, Stephanie Anderson wrote for the first time since changing her name, so weird! Megan Stockinger is engaged to Nic Hopkins (old Brother of Katie Hopkins, who was Brock Cutler’s GF for a while). Crazy business… crazy. Checked out byu.edu at President’s permission and I’ve got two choices… summer term or fall term. Summer = June 22 - Aug 10 with registration starting Feb 2.  Fall = Aug 31 - Dec 10 with registration starting March 30. I’m kinda feeling the summer term, because I’ll get 3 weeks at home (enough time) and then I’ll be on with my life. A chance to get some schooling and be down to get a job securely to go through the fall as well, before everybody else… or just chill with Elder Price’s family ;)


Got the keys for the new branch building, pounded some Pelmeni for lunch and now I’m sitting on this train, about an hour out of Savyolovo, planning on a Monday night FHE with the Sulimovy family in Kimri. Got there, had our 40 min of FHE and had to get out. Too bad we could only stay for that long.


11/25/08
Really wanted a breath of fresh air today, just something new… so we rode to the area “Krasnaya Polyana’ and did some contacting there.


Elder Cragun called and said that Vincent, who is getting baptized Saturday in the International Branch, has asked me to speak on baptism at the service! So off to another baptism in Moscow. 3 weeks I served in that branch and this is already the 4th baptismal service I’ve participated in:
1. Pat (interviewing & baptizing)
2. Maxwel (interviewing)
3. Joy (closing prayer, taught her her the first two lessons)
4. Vincent (baptism talk, re-found him in the area book, taught him about Joseph Smith and faith)


Showed President Filimonov the new building and finished out the night with 100% pineapple and 100% grape juice. Did some tracting!


11/26/08
Went over to Tamara’s place today… Elder Kodirov did some service in fixing up some holes and unsightly side effects of putting in new vinyl windows. He plastered it all up and then we had a lesson about the role the priesthood has played and plays today… why the restoration was necessary. She got it for a change! Understood what it means, an apostasy and restoration. She’s going to actually start reading the Book of Mormon and pray and she’ll be coming to church with us on Sunday too! Talked way too long, like always, made our way home, grabbed some stuff from the branch building on the way.


Had a 7pm at Zina and Katya’s, babushka and 13 year old granddaughter she’s raising. We talked about the priesthood and preparing (starting to prepare) for the temple. Gave them a copy of “Preach My Gospel.” Talking about the temple wasn’t in our plans, but another physical manifestation that the spirit does the teaching, through us.


Our new landlady called while we were at Tamara’s and due to some personal circumstances, which she declined to disclose, she wants to cancel the contract we signed Saturday. She can give us the apartment for a month and then take it. So we would have that time to search for a new apartment. We’ll see what goes down, because Lyuba gets paid to sort these kind of things out for us. No matter how much my native companion wants to help and be involved :)


11/27/08 - Thanksgiving
Woke up to a white as white Thanksgiving morning. A few more inches of snow came down overnight. We made it to the Gregories by a little after 11 am. Elder Kodirov and I played Scrabble until everybody else showed up. We had our district, 6 Elders, the Gregories, and Yura there. Sister Gregory did a stuffing from scratch that was amazing! We had instant mashed potatoes and gravy with chicken (no turkey, because it’s a hefty price in Russia), cranberry sauce, rolls, pumpkin pie, cake, ice cream… we were done for. Talked a little about the prophets from John Taylor till Howard W. Hunter and then a testimony bingo around the table.


Packed up the leftovers and took them home. We had English club on the floor (on our blankets), because the chairs are in the new building.


Fairly successful impromptu lesson with Artyom and Zhenya crawling under the blankets and screaming all the time.


Elder Kodirov had a long talk with a Muslim guy afterwards, from 8pm to 9:40pm, and he took a Book of Mormon. Really no chance of a baptism in the near future, but he has the word of God in Book of Mormon form, which will bring more knowledge and understanding of God to him.


11/28/08
Weekly planning for the super best perfect week, from Dec 1 to Dec 7. Bought and fixed everything for our Thanksgiving. Got the branch building all set up and in order. Thanksgiving, branch style, turned out to be a pretty good friendly activity. About 17 turned out, including 6 missionaries. The APs hung around after ripping up our old contract and giving us 50k rubles for a new apartment. Lera actually led the activity, a step in the right direction from the Halloween activity. We had chicken, plov (courtesy of Stas’s mom, the one who gave me the beshbarmak recipe), and salad. It was good stuff and a good opening for the building. The sacrament hall is cold, we’ll have the windows taped for real and maybe get a carpet to put down and bigger, more effective heaters.


11/29/08
The APs stayed with us in the house last night, went to Vincent’s baptism at 12pm (via bus from Lobnya to Altufeevo and the metro all the way down to Kashirskaya. Small crowd, Whitesides, Pages, Brother Rust, Sherif, Braden, the Bishopric member conducting the service, and the 6 of us missionaries. I spoke on baptism and Elder Kodirov told me afterwards how he understood me and Brother Page (who talked about the Holy Ghost). When I started my talk with the verses from Matthew 16:16-19, Christ and Peter’s interaction and talking about keys, I felt the spirit come in upon me. It was hard to talk about a gospel principle of such magnitude in English (I’ve been out of practice in English). 


So I think Mom and Dad will be pleased by the number of candid stories I share, to avoid the embarrassment of trying to expound on gospel principles without the practice being included among the reasons. We had planned on a culture night, but with the falling through of another apartment, we thought we’d be with our hired real estate agents finding a new apartment. Call from the APs, no go, we do some contacting and preparation for the Sabbath and agree on seeing an apartment tomorrow.


11/30/08
Dasha and Kseniya come to church, but Mom is home… giving birth! Papa is with her. We met Tamara and got her to church for the first time. 27 people at Sacrament meeting! An all-time high since I’ve been here. The Zheltovy (an in-active, sealed family) showed up unannounced, a nice pleasant surprise. Stas actually came on time and Olesya got her first shot at her calling, playing piano in sacrament. Sister Larisa brought her friend / roommate, Valentina. She was at church last week, Thanksgiving on Friday, and today again. We’re going over tomorrow for a first lesson FHE (she took a Book of Mormon home today).


Talked to President Filimonov about starting a gospel principles class and to Maksim about creating some sort of simple branch mission plan.


Elders Angelo and Earl met with Stas, and about now is when the rubber meets the road. Will he react like Denis in response to learning the commandments? That’s the man who learned about the word of wisdom (no more drinking) and honesty (need to pay for your train ride), and disappeared on us. Or will he make the changes necessary? I’m excited for him because I think the latter. 


We spent the afternoon running around. Looked at one apartment with a way great landlady (Svetlana and her husband Aleksandr). Way close to the branch, only 22k rubles a month, but we can only move in the 17th of December. 


The other apartment is way nice, a completely brand new kitchen, filter already installed with a separate faucet (like in Kazakhstan), new Samsung oven and range, pressurized cabinets, adjustable fridge temperatures, way more space, and awesome bunk bed (twin over queen), big old desk for study… but on the other side of the city and 5k rubles more a month. I knew the right choice right when we saw the nicer apartment, but the natural man wanted the luxury of the better apartment. But we’re going with the first and moving in with Dolgoprudny for a couple of weeks, leaving one suitcase each in the branch to make things easier. Spent the rest of the night in the process of getting all our stuff and old branch stuff and old missionary stuff sorted out in preparation for moving out!


12/1/08
Christmas time has arrived! Got screwed over in all our plans today…
* Went into the office early, missed study
* They haven’t done the English invitations yet, had to redo the map for the tri-folds. They were supposed to get them to Dolgoprudny Elders at football, they forgot!
* Hit the train break at Dolgoprudny, so had 1.5 hours taken. We browsed a bookstore, I bought some pirated Soviet classics
* Elder Kodirov lost his wallet between the matrushka and Lepyoshky after the office… and his 6k rubles for the month.
* No time to pack or move anything
* Vanya’s (President Filimonov’s son) performance concert was sold out, so we didn’t get in.


And so, we weren’t in the best of moods… but the good from yesterday… writing home news:
* Jennie Root is pregnant
* Amanda starts driver’s ed
* Aaron finished BYU application
* Already having to start applications for spring / summer term scholarships and bugging Mom & Dad about getting me housing


* At the cash register of ‘Kopeka’ and the lady asks, “I see ‘Elder’ on your little badge, that’s not a Christian church, is it?”


“Actually, it is, the Church of Jesus Christ” We point out, and the security guard, overhearing the conversations, chimes in, “we’re Russian Orthodox, not allowed to change your faith!” Oh Russia, good grief


* Our member-present lesson with Valentina, Sister Larisa Soskova’s roommate. They’re old friends. She’s 70, Orthodox, but Larisa is doing good at getting her to come to church and praying together. She’s started reading the Book of Mormon, but doesn’t remember anything she reads. It will have to be a slow, simple, visual teaching process. But it will be good for us and especially for Elder Kodirov, in learning to cut down on his talking and complicating things during the lesson. She’s going to start praying now along with reading the Book of Mormon. The only concern is that Sister Larisa is still holding to some Russian Orthodox traditions, like the icons up, which we hope she doesn’t pray to them, incense burning, orthodox fasting (only excluding meat / dairy products) and just weird stuff (her dream interpretation book). Hope we can help both of them be free from these traditions.


12/2/08
The day the Lobnya house died, in the eyes of the missionaries. From 11 am until 6 pm, we were picking up, packing up, moving out and moving around. All things to one of 3 places, the branch, the garbage, or with us to stay in Dolgoprudny for the next 2 weeks.


Had to mention something I saw the other day, a hatchback with a spoiler on the roof.


We’re now living in a foursome in Dolgoprudny, fun memorable times! Elder Angelo’s just a tad trunky, but still a good missionary.


12/3/08
First day (from Dolgoprudny apartment), lots of contacting and searching for service, and following up on ‘come back later’ tracting responses. Commuting, buying cheese and butter on the market, talking with Elder Kodirov to try and help him get over constant impolite rejection, throwing bus tickets from the tenth story and picking it up at the bottom.


We helped our second drunk-as-a-skunk guy home. This one an old man with a cane. And only a few hundred feet, but there was probably no other way he would have made it home for the night.


12/4/08
Tracting on Krasnaya Polyana. A big building with 4 or 5 open stairwells and 68 apartments each. We did the first one with some decent success.


Had a district meeting at the new building. Elder Gavrilov was with us, with the mini-missionary from Yarosloval (he’s just a little weird). Talked about the 10 family goal and what plans and actions are we undertaking in our finding in order to achieve the goal. That is, to baptize 10 families in one year, starting from this past summer. We have 1 in the mission so far and so we discussed how to go about talking to people about their families and how to interest entire families.


Ate and cambe back to Lobnya with 40 minutes till English club and 3 ITLs to reach the 30 we set for the day. We talked to those 3, and the next person we met was Jamal, a former investigator who knew Elder Gustaveson and we let him know where the new building is and he said he’d stop by Sunday. We have an Arabic Book of Mormon with a sticky note and his name on it.


Interesting how the Lord blessed us with that little experience after achieving the goal we set. English club was low quality, thrown together lesson and a matching thrown together spiritual thought, an object lesson without the object!


12/5/08
Weekly planning, tracting… rather uneventful day. In the evening we had our FHE, Friday style. Probably one of the lamer ones. Masha and the kids (Artyom and Zhenya), Anya, Lera, and the 4 of us missionaries.


The spiritual thought about the apostasy kind of failed… and we just sat playing Uno for most of the time. Elder Kodirov and I are calling for doing away with it, because it’s not fulfilling the purpose - fellowshipping church members, investigators, and English clubbers. 


Got home late because we missed the 8:36 train and had to take the 9:15. 


12/6/08
More tracting this afternoon, ate lunch, started our fast and went to follow up on Artyom. We gave him a Book of Mormon about a month ago. He said to give him a month to read it. He wasn’t home from work yet. Then we went to check up on Sergei who said we could come on the weekend. He wasn’t home either, so we were left to make phone calls to everyone. Tamara bailed on church tomorrow, too tired from keeping her Sabbath Saturday, and Masha gave us the more and more common “I’ll try”. Valentina will be there though and we’ll be going to the Zheltoviy and Sulimoviy on Sunday. Feels like this fast might be helping Elder Kodirov get a little back on track.


12/7/08
Pearl Harbor day, showed the Gregories how to get to the church building. At 10am, President Filimonov showed up for church, the Nichiporovs (father and daughter) came, Sergei Pavlenko was called as 1st counselor to President Nichiporov.


A random lady, Lyudmila, showed up asking about English Club. Elder Kodirov convinced her to stay for Sacrament meeting, and she was crying when we sang “I Stand All Amazed”


Sister Valentina is being steadily drawn in by the feeling of the Spirit, like she described it, it’s just nice to be there at church and enjoy the calm, the peace.


Forgot to write last Sunday, Elder Angelo and I had to run to the old branch building during Sunday School to grab the toys for the nursery. Ridiculous.


We had branch council after church and it was reminiscent of the crazy Soklniki branch council we had about doing branch activities a while back. Only we asked about Friday nights, if it’s worth doing. President Filimonov about jumped down our throats doing a gainer half-twist, deciding to kick and punch at the same time. That said, at the ‘encouragement’ of our branch president, Friday night activities will continue. Our task is to improve them, to make them worth holding.


Branch Christmas party going down the 26th of December, Friday, the day after Christmas.


Met the Zhaltoviy family. They live in an area called Marifino, a 20 minute bus ride from the station 3 stops north of Lobnya. In a little valley village cabin. They’ve already been members for a while, but for some reason lost steam after going to the temple. He said it was in Oakland. They’re old friends with the Filimonovs and are happy to have us over, so we’ll be visiting a little more often now.


Went to Kimri after that, met Ilya and Nikolai on the platform and went to the Sulimoviy to partake of the sacrament and have a little testimony meeting. Lena, the new baby, is a week old and doing well, despite his 10 year old sister constantly touching and moving him. Everyone seems in really good spirits with the birth and new year approaching. Missed our 7:28 train, so had to come in on the 8:50, getting home way late, ate some of Elder Kodirov’s half-year pie (6 month mark on the mission) and juice, then went to bed.


12/8/08
P-day, study, email, Aaron’s gonna take revenge on Coach A for the Taylor clan on Thursday. No transfers in our district, except for Elder Randall’s out to Nizhniy and Elder Burgess is AP. Went in to Moscow for the ‘perfect p-day’ to end the perfect week. Ate pizza, talked, played ping pong and foosball at Novokuznetskaya.


Got back to Lobnya with 40 minutes to swing by the branch for the DVD player and movie ‘Restoration’ to show Valentina and Sister Larisa. Had FHE with them, talked about prophets and showed the movie. Elder Kodirov and I gave Sister Larisa a blessing, as she was starting a new job the next day. Interesting question, what do you do when you get a distinct impression during a blessing, but you aren’t voice? I remember the words, “Do not forget the covenants you made in the temple) in my head, but didn’t do or say anything.


Yet again, missed the 8:36, caught the 9:15 to get home late, with the other Elders coming off FHE with the Filimonovs.


12/9/08
Full study again! Missed the 11:10 to Lobnya and had some phone calls and stuff to sort out with the apartment. Went shopping for groceries, ate, and went to Tamara’s for service. Which consisted of Elder Kodirov spackling and puttying the windowsill areas again. Her feeding us (borscht, grechcka, salad, eggs, and tea and goodies). Spiritual thought with the paper and cutting a hole to crawl through. Recomitted her to read the Book of Mormon from the beginning, like she promised last time. Made the 8:36 train home on time. Elder Kodirov did his puttying in a heavy death metal tshirt to cover his white shirt, with a skeleton thing and burning baby… way funny. I really love tea now, even more now!


12/10/08
Got our train, returned the DVD player to the branch and got my shoe polish from the other suitcase. Never thought I’d be so happy to have shoe polish again. It’s been wet and muddy and my shoes had gone a week without real shoe shine.


Half tracted a building until we overheard babushki the floor above us complaining to each other. We had just knocked on their doors and they straight up wouldn’t listen to us. We left to avoid any problems and started a nearby building. After one stairwell, we went out on the street and saw a little police car in front of the first stairwell. Moved ourselves along after that.


Had a chudo and bulochka break. Had a power hour of English club contacting lunch. Really felt like the power hour was good, had us focused for that period of time, more goal driven. Then called some former investigators. 3 agreed to further meeting! Tomorrow we’ll stop by Valentin’s little parking lot booth and at 4 we’ll meet with Naim, who ordered a Finding Faith in Christ video a year ago. Then Saturday night we’ll call Anatoly, the man with no hands, about meeting Sunday. He answered “I see a familiar number and hear a familiar voice, Ironroad street, building 3B, right?” Which was the old branch address… pretty incredible.


So we’re pretty excited about the potential of working with these people again.


Finished off the night with a little 30 minute contacting run on the ‘other’ side of the tracks, based on a prompting. Talked to Sergei for a while, funny old guy. We’ll see if he takes the initiative to come to us. He’s got no phone, works at the airport, like most people in Lobnya. Crazy lady called, promising she’d call me the best missionary, if I just told her my name. I just messed with her until she gets sick of it.


We’ll be looking for a completely different apartment starting tomorrow. The 17th is apparently too long to wait, so we’re going to get er done!


12/11/08
District meeting, APs showed up and left right away to get President Cranney’s passport. Elder Parker took to the airport with him on accident. Talked about companionship inventory and broke it down by sentence in Preach My Gospel.


Got our apartment finally! After 3 falling through, we signed the contract and got the keys for an apartment we’ll move into on Saturday, the 13th, which is Elder Kodirov’s birthday. The ‘ideal’ one wasn’t working out too well. Miscommunication with the landlady, her agent, and us, and her agent suggesting some not too honest ways to please our leaders until the 17th when we would be able to move in. So we dropped that and got one right away!


Naim cancelled, he was in Moscow, so we got a snack at Kvartal, bread and chuda, and then met Valentin over by Diski, across from Atak, the soon to open supermarket on the south west corner of the square. Great lively old man. Got a little acquainted and set the ground for teaching him the plan of salvation next time.


English club, it was cool. Before it started, Zhenya was in the hall, looking at the first vision painting and asked why there were two Jesuses. I told him it was God and Jesus, and that they appeared to Joseph Smith because he prayed. I basically taught him the first vision and restoration in 30 seconds, and then he turned around and started asking about the picture on the December Liahona (nativity).


Ran over to the old building afterwards with President Filimonov. We found our Christmas decorations, returned the landlord’s toys and had his mom chew us out for the mosquito blood stains all over the walls in the master bedroom (thank you Elder Wirthlin for that) and for the cockroaches in the tub and kitchen. We offered our help if they want in repainting the place… we’ll see what happens.


President Fimilonov has this idea about getting the church a little better public identity in passing out these little cards with a Christmas verse from the Bible. From the book of Isaiah. Then ‘Merry Christmas, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints’ on the back. To do it in three phases and on the last one, already use a Book of Mormon scripture, similar to the Biblical one. He’s talked it over with President Pieper and Cranney. They’re both in, so we’re going to try it out in Lobnya and Dolgoprudny. Getting 50 out a day to people.


12/12/08
Happy birthday mom! Went into the office with the new contract and to get some supplies and pick up Christmas packages! Bought some lepyoshki, without the fanfare of Elder Kodirov losing his wallet this time around.


Ate and had half a weekly planning before having to run over to FHE. Only made it right at 7pm, finding the other Elders, both Stas’s, Mash and company waiting. A good turn out all in all. Spiritual thought - counting our blessings - gave a paper out for everyone to list them. The game was pictionary, managed to get away from that cursed Uno… at least until the very end, when we played 1 round. Waffle cookies / wafers, and then ran to only just miss the 9:15pm train with Stas. Caught the 9:25pm, which skips Vodniki, so we walked home a little bit later than usual.


12/13/08
Happy birthday Elder Kodirov! Turned 26, he’s an old one. We moved today and cleaned the branch.


How it went down… we started loading everything up about halfway through companionship study, in order to make the 11:10am (we forgot that Saturday has no train break). Elder and Sister Monson from Nizhniy called to wish Elder Kodirov a happy birthday while on the way to the platform. Elder Kodirov starts running up the hill across the bridge there off of Vodniki that leads up to the platform, thinking we’re going to miss our train. I, thankfully, checke my watch to find out that it’s 11:04.


We plop down on the platform, then got on the 11:10 to only be stopped 15 meters off the platform. I thought I heard a scream and I think somebody / something got hit. A lady standing at the end of the wagon, where people get on and off and smoke, looks out the door, covers her mouth and whispers “horrible”, but then we start up again, so I don’t think it was a person. We drag all our stuff over, then run over to the branch to grab everything we left there for the two weeks we were in Dolgoprudny. Got all that stuff over, went out and grabbed food to get us through to Monday and started on the olivet salad my companion loves. It’s the salad everyone makes for New Years. Boiled eggs, boiled carrots & potatoes, pickles, peas, ham all cut up into cubes and mixed together with mayo. Let it sit for a few hours in the fridge and you’re good to go. Our landlady showed up, and we weatied and talked and ate while the washing machine didn’t show up until 7pm. It’s apparent that she’s planning on coming over often to water her plants.. And she’s got a bunch of meat in the freezer, and half the closets and drawers are still filled with her stuff. So we’ll have to come to a compromise on that. She’s a widow, has a 50 year old son and a 40 year old daughter who died a few years back. She’s still pretty broken up about that one.


We ate, she sat in with us, finished up, and then the deliverymen finally showed up. We installed it, seemed to work. She finally left, probably 3 hours here! We went and cleaned up the branch building from Friday night and that was it.


12/14/08
Our first night in the new place. My bed is hard, springy, and noisy. But at least it’s not too small. Realized that we don’t have a shower curtain, forced to take crouching showers until we get one. There’s a giant mirror directly to the left when you sit down on the toilet, so you get a nice profile of your de-pantsed self. The toilet is a trophy-caser, with the shelf above it. The kitchen is rugged. There are no carpets in Russia, just large large rugs.


Met the Sulimoviy to open the branch at quarter to 9am. Only pa and Dasha today. Mom still at home with the baby, and Ksyusha no doubt wanting to help. Elder Wirthlin brought his parents, Stas his new car (a Mazda 3), Masha her kids, Nelly her completely distorted views, Anya came herself finally! Tamara showed for Sunday school, and so we had 30 or so in total. Tamara made us some pie / rolls / dumplings. Good stuff we ate and went to the First Presidency broadcast for Christmas with Anya. Good for her, Stas, and Nelly to meet more of the youth there, and Sister Nartova. On the way back, we found out that Anya is interested in the church, but her parents are way Orthodox, so she can’t do anything right now. Like even bringing a Book of Mormon home would get her into trouble. They are the ‘Cult! Cult!’ type.


After hearing Elder Eyring’s talk about Christmas traditions, Samuel the Lamanite getting hit in their family plays, I decided that we’ll have some more traditions in the family I’ll be father of than in our current family.


12/15/08
No vengeance from Aaron, not having as great a start to his senior season as he had hoped. Sounds like the whole family is going to be home for Christmas, including new in-laws and everything. Yay! For more awkward conversations during the phone call.


Couldn’t find tuning forks in Lobnya, but didn’t matter because President Filimonov called 45 minutes prior to our scheduled FHE to cancel. We got held up in the post office mailing Elder Kodirov’s books and stuff to his sister. When Tamara finally answered, found out she was expecting us before 5pm… and that 6:30pm was too late anyway, she was already too tiered. So we decided to personally invite Lyuba and Vladimir (baptist preacher) to the Moscow choir performance Friday night, talking to people on the way. We only had time for one long conversation with Viktor, a 50 year old guy who believes in the religion of love, cold water bathing, and wishing health to everyone, yourself included. Got his # after 40 minutes or so, made it to Lyuba and Vladimir’s in time to invite, then run back home and we actually planned tonight! Feels good to atually do things the way you’re supposed to.


12/16/08
Contacting on Krasnaya Polyana in the afternoon, picked up the remaining ingredients needed for white chili. Made white chili, but ate grechka (1.5 hours to make the chili, so we just frigid it for Wednesday). Planned our lesson for Valentina. Went tracting, feeling like we should follow up in the Depot area where we met an older man and woman we had given some literature to. We saw them slip into the last stairwell after our first encounter, so we came back to that street with the intent to tract into them. We tracted it out fairly unsuccessfully. One big, fat, shirtless guy, late 20s to early 30s, who smelled like plov, opened up, but declined. Everyone else was no through the door. Until we came ot the first floor, first door, apartment 4.


Anatoly Alekseevich let us in, an old man with a Santa Claus beard and a fitting jovial canter to match. WE chit-chatted in the entry way. He showed us the bible he’s been studying for 25 years and says he’s got questions no one knows the answers to. Interesting how he told us, he got the book in the 80s, when it was plausible to have the bible. Unlike the 70s, where you’d be put in jail for owning one. In the 60s you’d be shot. In the 50s and 40s you’d be shot and then they’d shoot your family. We sat in his little room for 10 minutes or so. He lives in a communal apartment. One kitchen, one bathroom, one apartment for two families. He, a bachelor, and someone else. Not sure who, we didn’t see. He invited us to come by anytime in the afternoon after 1pm, except on the weekends, because he watches hockey.


We ran from his place to Larisa and Valentina’s. We had a lesson about the plan of salvation, using the pictures. She’s reading and praying herself, it’s just not quite sinking in yet… but with time and repetition, all should go well. She told us we’d all end up in the telestial kingdom for sure, because we’re sinners. But we explained that Christ doesn’t want that and that’s why we are given the opportunity to repent. It was funny how she pointed to the stars and said, ‘ohh, we’ll go here, yeah, we’re sinners’


12/17/08
Ate our white chili for lunch and met up with Elders Belov and Whilhite for a split. Elder Belov and I are going to Thursday’s DL and ZL conference. We worked, contacted in the Sokolniki area and spent the night there with Elder Kragun and Berlin. We discovered where all Russians are when it’s -5 C on the streets and dark. You would think they’re at home, drinking tea and watching TV, but nope, they’re in Ashan!


My first time being there yesterday. Felt like a Costco / Walmart mix. Warehouse size and style, but paint floor tiling and escalators, like would be in Walmart. Santa hats for 4 roubles 95 kopecks a piece.


12/18/08
Bus to Rosinka was way late and we got stuck in traffic. But no worries, we had our ZL and DL conference, 16 people there. Spiritual thought from Sister Cranney. Kazakhstan had 91 people at church the last time the Cranneys were down there, we were at 45-50 when I served there. Brother Sultan Dautov is now the branch president, taking over from Murat Imangezeev.


A little training from President Cranney, separate from ZLs who were with the APs. Read from white bible, the missionary leadership section, strongly encouraged us to study that section.


From the APs, we talked about nightly phone calls and making those a more uplifting and inspiring experience. (right at 9:30pm, in missionary clothes, etc.). Then from President Cranney to all of us, we talked about covenants… compared us to the stripling warriors again and their covenants and ours. We’re not doing these things because Preach My Gospel says so, or because our leaders promise us cookies or anything. It’s because we’ve entered a covenant to sacrifice for the building of the kingdom of God, and because we’ve consecrated our time, talents, and means to the furthering of that work. We’re bound to God with a promise that we all personally made upon entering the temple. That’s why you go to the temple before going on a mission.


12/19/08
A little contacting, weekly planning. My pride has been acting up again lately and it’s making it hard to be at peace with Elder Kodirov in my mind and heart. But I’m praying for forgiveness and strength to overcome it at the moment. Ate lunch, planned, then bounced to catch the elektrichka for the 6:30pm Christmas Moscow choir concert. With half of the men’s section as missionaries. A really good performance, and found out that Sister Nartova and Sister Leslie are meeting with Anya come Sunday!


We called Tamara, she hasn’t been reading like she said she would. We keep hearing excuse after excuse.


From contacting today, I wonder how the Russian Orthodox church can get away with what they do in a fairly well educated and very literate country. They claim to be the first Christina church, all historical facts show it was the Catholic church before the orthodox split. Candles and icons and everything. We talked to a man who was in a coma for a significant amount of time. He woke up, become religious, insisting it’s most important to be true to what your forefathers believed.


12/20/08
Sat with a man named Igor today for 45-55 minutes. Froze myself, but it was good for him. He’s a little bit crazy, maybe a little more than just a little bit. He was put up in a psychiatric hospital in Dolgoprudny, that had the same wallpaper as his old apartment. In the 8th grade he had a classmate try to shoot him, but hit a bird that got spooked instead. He’s all into the numerology (666 and the devil’s number, adds up to 18, 18 is the age you get an official citizen’s passport in Russia, and so on). Told us a story about how he took a dried piece of bread out of a raven’s beak and ate it, like Elijah, who was fed by the ravens. That was the day he was released from the psychiatric hospital. We gave him a tri-fold and family proclamation (he asked for it) and we parted ways.


In the evening, we cleaned the branch for sacrament meeting and our plan for a meeting with Valentina fell through. So plan B was tracting out building 20 on Bukinskaya highway. We tracted until a lady told us to stop brainwashing her neighbors, that we don’t live in this building and asked if we wanted her to call the police. So we left and came to plan c, stop by Valentin’s parking lot and sit in his booth and talk for a little while. We sat, Elder Kodirov on the bed with Valentin, and me on the little stool, with coats hanging behind me, forcing me to lean forward during the whole conversation. We talked about how God blesses those who obey his commandments, and reading the Book of Mormon, and a little about baptism. It was a good enough conversation that the spirit was there and we gave him a good pick-me-up and built enough trust that we should be able to pick up teaching him in our next discussion.


12/21/08
Sulimovs came down with the baby (less than a month), but didn’t catch the train, except Dasha and Kseniya, they made it for church. But came just right after church ended. Valentina worked today, so she didn’t make it to church. Tamara is eating up our invitations, but it’s feeling like she’s not going to follow through with commitments. She wasn’t at church today either. And Masha has seemed to have just stopped coming to church, period. Igor, our psych hospital friend from saturday, showed up between sacrament meeting and Sunday school and sat with me through the lesson. It took him a while to figure out the hymn book (in fact, didn’t quite get it figured out). He asked where he could get a copy of the Book of oMormon, and I told him, “here” and went to the shelf there in the sacrament hall and gave him one. He left and said he would try to make it for the first part of the meeting next week.


After church we had our branch missionary coordination meeting, talked a little about goals for the coming year, including 6 baptisms ( a repeat of this year) and 10 ‘first discussions’ (conversations in a finding setting which include Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith, or and are no shorter than 20 minutes). We gave Maksim a few ideas in helping the members and missionaries unite in doing the work: handing out one Book of Mormon a month to a church member to pass along to a friend, family member, or acquaintance, and then following up; doing a continuous branch fast, where one member fasts one day, then call the next person who’s going to fast an hour before finishing and have them start, so it’s a chain of fasting for as many days as you have members willing to do it. We’ll have to bring up home teaching in our next meeting.


Our two planned meetings fell through, Artyom said he didn’t want anything more to do with us (but was polite in saying it) and then Tamara just whimpered out. Seems to be the rend of late.


Forgot about a little miracle, so we were contacting, finding since our two meetings got cancelled on us. We had pretty much nothing, we returned some of our old landlady’s Christmas decorations we took on accident, and by the time we contacted home, it was 8:35pm, still 25 minutes left to work. Eder Kodirov said as we were waking up to our building, “I just want to be able to serve someone, nothing big, but to be able to put a checkmark in my head that we helped someone.” As he was opening the door to go in, I asked him, “Then why don’t we? We’ve got 25 minutes. Let’s say a prayer, ask for the chance, and then go find it.” 


He was a little hesitant, especially about “praying in public on the streets”, so we sat down on the benh outside our building and he offered a simple prayer. As he prayed, I imagined the layout of the city, pictured myself walking down it’s roads as I had already done many times. One walkway stuck out in my mind, in the ‘park’ between the main street, Lenina, and the street with our local supermarket. 


So after the prayer, we took off. Elder Kodirov asked me at the corner of our street, and the street of the supermarket where we were going and I told him “here” as I turned left. We came to the walkway, having passed 2 or 3 older women scurrying by in the cold. It was already dark, we’re recommended not to approach women in these kinds of conditions, suspicious especially for two big guys like Elder Kodirov and myself. We passed by the first few stores on either side of the walkway, Elder Kodirov in front of a man passed us, and I just looked at him and he stopped, and I stopped, and my companion just kept walking, as often is the case :)  The man was way drunk, a can of beer was visible in one coat pocket, and a bottle of vodka in the other. Both his hands gripped tightly to a pile of 3 or 4 chocolate bars and his face was smeared with chocolate around his lips.


“What are you selling!?” he asked loudly. “Nothing, we don’t sell anything, we give it away…” he interrupted before I could finish “How much?” pointing to the Book of Mormon in my hand, “that book, it’ll sit on my nightstand forever. How much?”


“Free” I answered. He took it out of my hands before I could take all the invitations out of it. 


“500, I’ll give you 500 roubles” which is just over 20 bucks.


“No, we don’t want your money”


“Take the money!”


“I’ve got money,” I replied. Elder Kodirov told him to take his 500 and buy a present for his grandson for New Year’s. We got the invitations out of the book, and sent him on his way with the Book of Mormon. God really answered that prayer, even though the man probably didn’t remember a thing about our encounter, or that it even happened. The next morning, his home has a Book of Mormon in it and who knows who might pick that up and read it someday!


12/22/08
Got the phone call figured out in email, the Museum of Modern History was closed, bought Prince Caspian for New Year’s and went all the way down to the south end of the gray line and a 20 minute walk from there, to pick up Elder Kodirov’s suitcase his sister and aunt sent him.


Got back in time to buy groceries, eat, and then go over to Larisa’s and VAlentina’s. First half of 3rd lesson. Went well, except for the fact that Sister Larisa Soskova still honors saints and icons to some extent and it didn’t exactly invite or retain the spirit when she started off about their ‘missions’ in the spirit world. Everything’s in place for Thursday’s phone call. We got blini tonight (Russian crepes), not the greatest, especially the thick doughy one I had to put down!


12/23/08
Cleaned up our pigsty of an apartment, ate lunch, went over to Anatoly Alekseevich, the man lives in poverty (pension of 4000 roubles a month in total, ~ $160 month, ~$1940 a year!). He’s got one room in a communal apartment, eats rice and eggs, reads and watches hockey and TV.


Not the greatest discussion. Pretty dang set in his ways and said he wouldn’t promise to read the Book of Mormon, but that he’d at least open it, glance at it. Treats us like children, says that after we’ve lived 20 or 30 more years, we’ll learn something. We’ll have lived enough life, seen enough to have room to talk. Kinda frustrating, but like he personally said, “I’m a product of the Soviet communist era,” just can read the Bible well enough after 25 years to know that he’s actually a product of a Heavenly Father.


After giving him a Book of Mormon, we went back to our old landlady’s because all the decorations were, in actuality, ours. His dad, an old Georgian guy, was home. He let us in, gave us some juice and candy and talked about politics for a long time. He’s decided that America’s the only place you can peacefully live anymore. He told us about how some bandits wanted to punish him for letting our church rent out the place there in Lobnya. But he drank with the guy, then gave him a pamphlet the missionaries had given him a while back, explaining that it was the only difference in our faiths (they’re Russian Orthodox). The man left satisfied, without punishing our old landlord and his family. He swore like a sailor, but he’s a very hospitable man. So we took our decorations and went and set up the Christmas tree in the branch building.


12/24/08
Christmas all day celebration with all the missionaries (except KZ) at the south building. Played Russian scrabble, way hard, but I won both times, and against natives too! Tried playing Pit with Sister Gorina, then catchphrase with about 30-40 people.


Gift exchange, dinner, slide show of mission pictures for the year, a little bit of training from the APs and President Cranney. Grandpa Frost (Elder Kodirov) and his assistant, Snegurichka (Sister Leslie). President Cranney’s Christmas movie. Some musical numbers from missionaries, fun and serious (rudolph rap from Yaroslavl, etc.) Lots of mingling and we came away with apples, mandarins, peanut butter, tortilla chips, cookies, chocolate, etc.


It was good to just see everybody too and talk to people.


12/25/08
CHRISTMAS!


I made pancakes for Elder Kodirov, we studied, checked to see if the water is on in the branch building (it’s not, sorry Andrei Samentsov), got some of President Filimonov’s brainchild holiday cards, and in an hour we passed out about 100 each. A lot more uplifting reaction than we usually get. People actually say “Thank you!”


Went shopping, laundry soap and some New Year’s stuff.  I ate grechka, Elder Kodirov a ‘big lunch’, ramen noodles basically , and then he crashed. Slept for an hour and woke up with what appeared to be a pretty serious hangover, lol. Called some people, wished some Merry Christmases, and went over to Lyubov’s place. Elder Kodirov managed to forget my phone call home at 7pm, so we were there till 7:05pm, as I was basically dragging him out the door. Chatty Kathy! Got to Sister Larisa’s, my family had tried 2 or 3 times already, but the static and white noise made it impossible to hear or understand as Sister Larisa explained it. We hung up the phone, said a prayer. I asked my companion to say it, he made us late after all. After the prayer, maybe after 3 minutes, they called again, it wasn’t by audible, so we hung up and tried again. This time it turned out fine, with some occasional static, noise, and crackling, but good enough to talk for the hour. Talked, got a little acquainted with Kaylon and Paige. Heard both their voices for the first time. Afterwards were fed some nasty cookies, decent tea, and really good pears. Then came home for bed!


12/26/08
6 am, day after Christmas, keep my eyes closed in the dark (a little shout out to Ben Folds). Spent the afternoon passing out more of PResident Filimonov’s cards. He wants all of Isaiah out before New Year, then Luke from New Year to the 7th (Russian Orthodox Christmas), and then the Book of Mormon after the 7th. 


Then we ate (rice, omlettes), weekly planning, then the branch Christmas party. Lera was freaking out, but things went pretty well. Even without the DVD player that the Dolgoprudny elders took for New Year already, but we got that all worked out.


Elder Kodirov and I did the spiritual thought, a parallel reading of birth and resurrection verses from the bible. Then we did Christmas cards, played musical chairs to Franz Ferdinand. I won, then hot potato, and then we had refreshments. Turned out pretty well, Masha, Anya, and Valentina all showed up, so we were happy!


12/27/08
Dropped off the keys for some guy who’s supposed to fix the water… he said he’d do it Monday, yet another meeting without working toilets or running faucets. Passed out more cards, went and checked out Lugovaya, not a bad place to spend an evening tracting. It’s two train stops north of Lobnya.


Found a money building that would be great for ‘Russia’ pictures, that is, “welcome to Russia, big snowy field with wintry trees. After lunch, I gave Elder Kodirov a blessing. He’s still battling his ‘girlfriend’ demons, thinking about Ira all the rime.


We went to Krasnaya Polyana, both Vladimir and Sergey stood us up. But it put us in the right area to talk to Olesya and Tatyana in the last building on the last floor, the 4th and 2nd to last doors. Tuesday we’ll see about meeting with Tatyana. Elder Kodirov had a good talk tonight about how I don’t trust people and about why and how I can work on it. I got no empathy basically. President Pieper’ll be at church tomorrow, he’ll get to see our primary program.


It’s looking like I have an incredible difficult time trusting someone who doesn’t share the same priorities as I do, that is, who doesn’t place the same amount of importance on things I think are important. One example, the valuing of time as a missionary in my eyes and not exactly trusting a companion who doesn’t look at the clock, wear a watch, or care about what time we start study (8am, 8:05am, 8:15am). I just need to take a step back from my self righteous bell tower and look at things, take into consideration from the outside. Not everyone comes on a mission at the same level of preparation, or with the same Puritan work ethic, or with the same attitude towards things… but that doesn’t mean that they’re not worth trusting. It’ll take me a little while to convince myself of that.


12/28/08
Almost everybody showed up on time for church this week. President Filimonov was way early. Like Elder Kodirov said, it’s too bad President Pieper doesn’t come every Sunday, we would always be all on time!


It was the primary program, with all 3 kids from primary (the other 2 or 3 were sick). 31 people were there, an all-time record since I’ve been here! The Pieper family and district primary presidency helped with that.


Later, after lunch and personal study, we shared a spiritual thought from the corridor/hall with the Filimonov family, in exchange for the branch keys. It was about being happy, 2 Nephi 2:25, President Holland “Be of Good Cheer”, President Uchtdorf’s “Heritage of Happiness”. Then we had a meeting with Tamara. She fed us, we read 2 Nephi 2 together, but she’s not putting forth the personal efforts which are needed to find the truth, to get an answer, to read the Book of Mormon, to pray specifically about it, to come to church. We’re at a point right now where all we can do is encourage and invite her, we’re going to call about 2 times a week and share verses from the Book of Mormon with her.


12/29/08
Passing out the cards, over 3L can of pineapple for New Year, object lesson with apostalic foundation of the church and cups and how the church collapses without them. We made it.


We met with Valentina, Sister Larisa didn’t show up, as she was coming home late from work. We taught the apostasy with the object lesson and retaught the steps of repentance, then recomitted her to repent. She had prayed, but said that she didn’t feel anything. We reassured her that the Lord would answer her prayers, that he would forgive her.


Got an unexpected, very pleasant phone call today. President Cranney called to let me know that my next visa trip unfortunately, would not be to Spain… but to ALMATY! With Elder Burgess, we’ll be there for 3 days or so. Over a weekend, and so we’re already starting to plan out all of our time, with whom to meet, when, and how to get everyone to church to see us. Basically the best Christmas / New Year present ever.


12/30/08
Hit the wall as far as passing out the little cards. Got pretty sick of it this afternoon. Had a nice mashed potatoes with fried onion and carrot and mix in two eggs with the potatoes and it doesn’t come out too bad. Updated a few area book records, Atkhat called to congratulate us with the New Year. We went tracting out in Lugovaya, first building that the director wouldn’t let us in to, then about 6 stories of a 9 story building we got through.


One really strange Orthodox babushka prophesied about how good will come to me and God’s blessings for me in the future, and that to Elder Kodirov, nothing. He’ll be a sinner like the rest of us and all this superstitious stuff. Like Elder Kodirov said after, that Orthodox just took paganism, slapped Jesus Christ at the top and replaced the many gods with saints and Mary.


Bought a sirok and chudo drink in Atak and we called it a night. Tomorrow is the last day of the year!


12/31/08
Forgot to mention that yesterday we bumped into Anya on Lenina and she said she’ll be coming to church on Sunday. She’s the one who brought up the subject.


WE sent the old year out with a nice dinner, courtesy to Elder Kodirov, of chicken, olivet salad, mashed potatoes, and fruit salad. Then a night of movies. The traditional ‘S lyogkim parom’, which I really liked, then National Treasure 2 (not so much, but entertaining for sure). We finished it off with Chronicles of Narnia, Prince Caspian.


Part way through Natioanl Treasure, we put in on pause and watched the fireworks for about 45 minutes. Great view from the 13th story here in Dolgoprudny, and the fireworks were going steady from about 5 minutes before midnight until 2 am. The sky looked like Baghdad when we invaded. They showed it on the news with all the flashing reflections on the clouds.


1/1/09
A new year, wow. I remember when I was a lot younger and I did the math and figured out that my mission would last until 2009! It was a lifetime away and now I’ve just taken one little step from the brink of that year, forward.


This year has in store quite different things than last year. Less than half will be as a missionary, and it’s sobering to think about that end and real life back home, so I’ll just do myself a favor and stop there.


But as always, it’s a time for reflection and newfound determination to lose weight. I am American after all! Kidding, just messing, I do have some resolutions though. Let’s lay them out without further delay.
* Floss every day
* Wear retainers once a week
* Something with the harmonica


I’m finding it difficult, seeing as my goals and purpose and direction and everything will change 5 months in, and hard to predict the future in those regards. Probably best to leave post-mission goals alone until post-mission.


1/2/09
Cold day, -12 C, people at home, resting, vacationing, etc.


A rather quite afternoon of ‘light contacting’, lunch of kasha, dehydrated peas with onion and egg (not a keeper honey). A long weekly planning session and then we paid a visit to our friend, Panin, Anatoly Alekseevich, resident gradnpa frost. He fed us with black bread, cheese, cabbage, pickles, butter, hard-boiled eggs, and our rosehip tea. He poured in the biggest spoonful of sugar ever, felt like I was drinking warmed up kool aid, rocking rosehip flavor. He held out the bread, “hold this end and I’ll cut you piece”, cut off huge texas toast thick slices of black bread and slapped on a slab of butter to match the thickness. Then brought out the sala an garlic, put that down, then some ‘mineral water’, carbonated salt water, which was disgusting.


He accidentally had a swig of spirits, in the same bottles as the mineral water, he just didn’t look at the label before taking a little drink! Rather difficult conversation, but he’s still interested in meeting with us, so we’ll see. He hasn’t read anything from the Book of Mormon yet.


1/3/09
Dasha’s moved out of the house, only she came to church today (out of the Sulimov family)... they’re haing problems in that family… relationships / yelling / not happiness.


We got two new fan heaters that work fairly well. Cracks are starting to appear all over the branch building. Too bad.


One lady we invited to church from the street showed up today, the one who just bursted out laughing when I talked to her. We had been messing around / impersonating our ‘khovoreesh’ accents vs ‘govoreesh’. I didn’t exactly get it switched before talking to her, lol. 


After Sunday School, Valentina tried to get her to take a Book of Mormon and read it! She declined, left quickly after that. Later, we had a meeting with Valentina and Larisa and we saw the principle from 1 Nephi 13:37, “and blessed are they who shall seek to bring forth my Zion at that day, for they shall have the gift and the power of the Holy Ghost.”


She has received a testimony by the power of the Holy Ghost, that the Book of Mormon is of God, is true. We taught baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost today, but without the baptismal commitment. We’re going to talk to President Cranney about the situation as far as baptizing her without a branch in her hometown.


Met with Tamara today too, her son-in-law got drunk yesterday, started beating his wife (Zlata) and she told him to leave… so he took all the money, the documents, and left her. So she’s having a really hard time. We read Elder Holland’s talk about the word of God not ending with the Bible and an open canon and then a talk from Elder L. Tom Perry about the blessings of reading the Book of Mormon with a plan. She basically said that she can’t find even 5 minutes a day to read until the end of next month… influence of her pastors (Sergey who met with the missionaries, and Andrei, their new pastor) is hindering her reading and desire to read and pray.


Elder Gregory walked in this morning with an icicle booger coming off his infamous nose hair. Cold, just a little bit you might say.


1/5/09
P-day, wrote home… nothing particularly of note this week. Went with Atkham into Moscow to the mosque on Prospekt Mira, right next to the Olympic stadium. Sat in the prayer hall and talked to him a little. As we walked in, you take your shoes off and the door opens right into a stairwell, with shoe cubbies lining both walls. We just sat in the carpeted prayer hall at the top of the stairs and talked to Atkhat for a little bit after he did his prayer. He explained that the women’s prayer hall was on the floor above us.


He wanted us to join a discussion circle and ask questions. He’s a little bit of a Muslim missionary himself, despite his very limited knowledge of his own religion. But we declined, and all left, and headed back to Lobnya. We bought groceries and ended the night passing out President Filimonov’s Christmas / New Year’s cards. We targeted bigger building mailboxes specifically. Heard from a babushka ‘guards’ (the ladies who sit right outside the building entrance) that some residents had complained about our church being in their same building. It was likely Jehovah’s Witnesses and not us. We assured her that we were Christian, and normal people, and she let us pass out the cards.


1/6/09
Interviews today, scones from Sister Cranney, talked to President Cranney. He did help me out a bit with my problem of not trusting companions when our priorities don’t seem to match up. We read parts of DC 121, and he suggested getting the priesthood involved in the form of a blessing.


Let me know a little about the immediate future. Probably Elder Kodirov leaving me for the international branch, and me staying for another 5 weeks, before Dolgoprudny closes as an area, and my companion gets Elder Angelo’s companion from that area. The office elders are moving to Mitino (out by Rosinka) the next transfer, and they will become the international elders.


President Cranney gave some direction about Valentina, since she’s not a permanent resident here with Sister Larisa, and she’s from a place 2 hours outside of Nizhni Novgorod. But the whole situation still needs to be worked out.


Went from that interview to a split with Elder Angelo. He’s got a little over a month left and he’s counting down the days. We ate stroganoff and did a bunch of tracting. Dolgoprudny has a lot less people on the streets than Lobnya, so a lot of walking w/ not so many people, if you are street contacting.


Had a slightly drunk guy invite us in, to his sober family and relative’s dismay. He offer us 100 grams of vodka each. We declined, saying, ‘we don’t drink’.


‘Ahhh! You’re praying…’ he replied


‘Yes, we’re praying’ I said, and we just left them a card. Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year, then got ourselves out.


1/7/09
Forgot to mention that PResident Cranney commented Tuesday about having a strong prompting that we should do a lot of contacting on transport today…


So we finished up the split, we contacted around Dolgoprudny… was way cold, few people… checked out Elder Angelo’s souvenir shapki and met up with the others. Ate lunch and spent the rest of the night doing train / eletrichka contacting relays. They have monthly unlimited passes, so they rode down and back, we contacted / tracted while they rode, and when they got back, we met up, passed the passes, and switched roles. Personally, not much success, lots of coldness and not interested people. But Elder Angelo had a few good conversations and a contact or two, and Elder Kodriov had a woman say she’d come to church!


We ended up tracting near the end of the night. We had one guy freak out on us, because it was night and we were still passing Merry Christmas cards. He said ‘you are wrong’ and that we just don’t understand, we should have comthe night before and in the morning… but not Christmas night. He wouldn’t take the card. He was smoking, and Elder Kodirov kind of lost it. One big mistake, never say ‘young man’ to a middle-aged man who’s twice your age… it’s not the most respectful form of address!


Merry Orthodox Christmas!


1/8/09
Finished passing out all of President Filimonov’s cards, putting them in mailboxes in the bottoms of the taller apartment buildings. We can’t find an adapter / transition piece from our filter to our faucet, so wer’e going to have to replace the faucet.


Ate lunch, district meeting about accountability. Had Elder Earl teach some of it, passed out Reeses at the end, made things a little more interesting.


Gregories ‘checked’ our apartment, my first apartment check of my mission. We passed, mars bars all around. English club and then home to Lobnya. At English club, Lena, a recently returned sister missionary, showed up. She lives in Dolgoprudny, and we hope that we can convince her to come to Lobnya instead of Rechnoy branch. She could be a real help for the branch and for Anya, Masha, and all the young women, Dasha, Lera, Katya, etc.


Elder Kodriov gave Ruslan a Book of Mormon. We’ll see how things might turn out with that!


1/9/09
Bought our new faucet today to replace our old one, which doesn’t fit with the filter head / attachment we have. Replaced the faucet, with some hard work on Elder Kodirov’s part.


Ate lunch and headed into Moscow to meet up with the APs. It’s 42 roubles on the elctrichka from Lobnya to Timiryazevskaya now, and one ride on the metro is now 22 roubles. With the recent inflation, the dollar is now 30 roubles, as opposed to 23 roubles it was at the start my mission.


Switched Elder Kodirov for Elder Burgess, came back to Lobnya. Found out that transfers have been rescheduled to the 22nd of January, crazy stuff. Planned our spiritual thought for Friday FHE, only to have Lera be the only one. We played the game ‘words’, where one person thinks up a word, and the next person needs to think up a word that starts with the same letter that ended the previous word. Better than our typical Uno, that’s for sure, and a little bit of language study at the same time.


Hard to fall asleep. Pretty unreal, like I told Elder Burgess, back in the MTC< I don’t think I could have ever imagined that 1.5 years later, Elder Burgess and I would be spending the night together, the night before returning, going back to Kazakhstan. Like in Jacob, the lord’s ways are deep, mysterious, and unsearchable.


1/10/09 - Kazakhstan visa trip
Got to the airport on time, everything without a hitch. Took off our nametags in the airport and spent a good amount of the flight bouncing ideas off each other and trying to plan our training. Got in and went to the consulate before passport control, to get our visas. Guessed our way through the applications they gave us (lodging, address, who’s funding, etc.) and came out last from the airport. The first taxi tried to dupe us for 4k to 8k tenge, so we walked right outside the airport parking to catch one for 1.3k. And we’re out of here! Arrived at the at the Eurasia hotel and joined all the other missionaries, along with Brother Ku, for a culture night dinner at a Chinese-Korean restaurant. Good food and good company. I met Sister Davis and Sister Samsonovich for the first time, and it was good to see everybody else again, including the Vincents.


Found out that Sister Nurzya was waiting at the airport for us when we just strolled out and grabbed our own taxi, oopa :| 


We were in an apartment we rented out, and we were joined Monday morning by some Elders (two) from the Yekaterinburg mission. Saturday night we made quite a few phone calls. I talked to Valdimir, wife is Nina, Elder Parker and I met him tracting, Christmas dinner 2007. He said he comes in the spring when the weather allows him to go out. I got a hold of Yegor and boy was he surprised! I told him to come to church (tomorrow) and we could talk there, but he shied away. His voice kind of changed, and he said ‘I’ll try’... but if he didn’t make it, then we’d call and set up a meeting for before Wednesday.


1/11/09
We came to church, as usual, we were basically the first ones. Mirkhan, who Elder Anderson and I had just met (contact from the sisters) was the first to arrive, and it turns out that he’s made quite a lot of progress and comes to church regularly. Stood up to his Muslim friends when they pressured him into stopping meeting with us, but says that he’s not quite ready for baptism yet. Great job! The Imangezeev’s were next, and you should have seen how excited Brat Imangazeev was to see Elder Burgess! That Kazakh language, as I saw throughout this trip, really endeared him to the members and has the potential to open doors for the spreading of the gospel to the more humble, simple masses in Kazakhstan.


Bakhtyor was the same reaction every time we saw him (only difference was that I let him hug me this time).


Sister Inna looked straight at me, gave one of her exasperated sighs from all the craziness before church (she has a 5 month old baby now!) and just walked into the sacrament hall to start the prelude. It wasn’t until later that she realized what happened! She said ‘and maybe he really didn’t leave after all… who is he serving with, hmmm?’


Nastya saw Elder Burgess and was speechless, then saw me right behind him and her mouth just started to move without words coming out. ‘Well, ok, I’m gone’ she said and walked away.


Brother Yedil came to church becasue I had called him the night before, he was pretty much indifferent.


Sister Olga walked in the back of the sacrament hall while I was sitting in the back, talking to Vova. I turned in my chair and looked at her, and she just stopped dead in her tracks and face looked like she had seen a ghost. ‘How’ was about all she could get out.


After church ended, everyone started inviting us over. We went home with the Imangazeev’s, fed us plov, we met with Brother Imangazeev’s uncle, who raised him. He doesn’t speak Russian, but Elder Burgess did a good job with his Kazakh to converse with him.


Aurzhan was at home, she took a day off as she told us, gave us some of her pokemon figures, sang a KazakhNew Year’s song for us. Maks is doing well on his mission, almost a year out now. Sabina still wants to go on a mission, but she’s got some time to prepare.


After that, we stopped by Yel’s apartment. He was sleeping, so we decided to come by another time. We went ot the Vincents and talked to them for a while. We found out that Artur and his parents and family, the ones who lived in Tajikastan, decided to move to America when they went for General Conference and the temple. They sold everything and are currently, as far as Elder Vincent knows, seeking political asylum in America. They made it to Utah, and are working on preparing for the temple and getting Artur on a mission.


I called Yegor, who didn’t make it to church, and he said he’d look at his schedule Monday and call back for meeting. Not feeling so hot about that approach.


1/12/09
Finished preparing our training, about praying importunately like the parable of the importunate neighbor and the unjust judge. President Monson’s prophetic request for us to pray for the unopened areas. The family goal for our mission. Then DC 121, Joseph Smith’s prayer, and from 26-33, the part of the answer that we thought best applied.


Stopped by Yel again, he wasn’t home. Zone conference, we learned that we are supposed to start teaching our investigators that they shouldn’t partake of the sacrament until after baptism by President Cranney’s direction.


Made pizza, ate, then we took pics for visas and gave them to Sveta. Went Ramstor shopping, got cards and notebooks, little spiritual experience journals for those we were to visit. Went to Sister Nina and Kemal to start out. Took their bottles to the church with the Yekaterinberg elders (her pump out in the yard borke, so they haul them from the church to her place in Sveta’s car. And left them for filling. WE went to Yel after that, his son said he wasn’t home, then Yel came out from the other room and it was clear from his expression and words to Elder Burgess that he doesn’t want to talk to us. We went, a little disheartened, on a taxi ride to Sister Inna’s, and Gosha, and Masha and Sergey, and Seva (the Vanners). Wrote on the card and notebook outside their house on top of the garbage container.


Masha gave the spiritual thought, Gosha was wasted from cramming for finals. We had banana bread and tea, and then had to bounce to make it to Zoya’s. We paid way too much for a taxi up there, and wrote the card standing outside the complex. We knocked on their door and started singing ‘I am a Child of God”.


Gave them the card, chatted for a while, and then caught a taxi home to make it in at 9:40pm.


Called Maksim at Elder Burgess’s prompting and he picked up! He had just flown in to Almaty that day, so we agreed to for 8pm Tuesday at the church. I had texted Yegor the number of the Yekat elder’s travel phone so that he could call it and get a hold of me, but he didn’t.


1/13/09
Stopped by the Vincents in the morning with the keys, went ot Olga’s and Sasha’s and got fed with plov. Talked for a little while. Sasha’s grown a lot (in height and maturity) and he’s already looking forward to his mission (at 14 years old). Fixed a nonexistent internet problem for the Vincents. Called Yegor again, nothing. Wrote home at the new omega sector, huge place by the circus and went out to Sister Arina’s. Bought her tea (camomille, rich) for a gift, bought a mug and notebook for Maksim. Saw four sheep heads dried out for sale on a piece of cardboard, but was too shy to take a picture. Bought a card for the lady working the card booth. Went to Arina’s and stayed long enough to exchange gifts, words, and hear how our letters after we’ve left can still make a big difference.


Caught a 400 tenge taxi back to Ritz Palace, he got lost but we made it in time to wait for Maksim, who never came and never answered his phone. Said goodbye to everyone at institute / English club (not very many go to English club anymore) and went home.


1/14/09
Sister Nurzya picked us up at 3:30am. Amazing how she’s changed since I left. She smiles now, jokes around, and is kinda taking her husband's role right now in leading the family in prayer, coming to church, scripture study, etc. A complete 180 from where she was a year ago, and a lot thanks to Muran, her nephew who lives with them now who’s investigating the church. They have to live according to everything in order to set an example for him. She didn’t remember me, probably in part because she was a periodic church goer, and always in a huff, ready to chew you out for doing something wrong and now, she’s smiling, joking around, and openly talking about how she was in a rut like that and talking about Brother Zhastalap, her husband, still being in it


Unfortunately, Vitali is working in western Kazakhstan right now, so we didn’t get ot go over. But maybe in April we’ll have the chance! Maybe Yegor and Maksim won’t flake out next time either!


We made the flight without any problems, made it home, talked to our land lady about the privacy issues, got them fixed. WE did it at her place, and wow, she showed us a picture of her granddaughter that was borderline pornography. Whoa whoa whoa! Please don’t! Crazy Russian babushka.


Met a young man named Valdimir, with huge gauges, a nose ring, long hair, and army boots, chains, leather coat. We have a meeting tomorrow with him about the Book of Mormon, when he’s sober!


1/15/09
The alarm clock got unset, we slept in till 8:40am or so.


Our ‘final’ district meeting, again, at our place with tvorog pie to start out. We talked about promising blessings and talking to people about their families and connecting the two. Elder Angelo had a really good spiritual thought about doing something every day that scares you to death, to get out of the comfort zone.


English club, 5 people there, plus the kids. No beginner group people showed up. Spiritual thought - taught them the words to ‘A child’s prayer’ and how I sing it to myself when I get bad / unpleasant thoughts.


1/16/09
Weekly planning, so-called ‘last one’ Picked Elder Kodriov’s wallet that he left at clothes repair shop. Gave a kid named Stas an English invite, more about him on Saturday. Our friday night FHE turned into another ‘hang out’ session, without a spiritual thought, without a prayer, without a hymn. I sat and played with Zhenya and Artyom out in the hall to free up Masha, but to no avail. That freed her up to play Uno uninterrupted. Everyone shot down our seminary / institute idea, but promised to come Sunday… seeing as it’s probably someone’s last Sunday… until, wait, phone call from Elder Neipp, the transfers have been put back one more week, until Jan 29th. So the eternal transfer goes on.


1/17/09
Felt really weighed down today, in part by the news of another week to wait for transfers. Just being sick and tired of Lobnya, same investigators, Elder Kodirov as companion. Told him about it, asked for a blessing and that helped.


Made the same pie from district meeting for the Zheltovy family, whom we visited. Inactive middle-aged couple who live 4 stops north of Lobnya and one 20 minute bus ride east, Marfino. We met, on the bus, Abos, a young kid from Uzbekistan. Gave him an English flier and when we were walking back from the Zheltovy’s, we met up with him again. He apparently lives by them. On the bus, Elder Kodirov talked to, guess who, Stas! The kid from yesterday. Appears that he’s interested in the religious aspect as well, said his friends went once to English Club but didn’t like it, so Elder Kodriov told him to come and see for himself.


We showed up right on time for the 60 bus from their place straight to Lobnya. Came home, baked another pie, for Anatoly Alekseevich, went over, and he loved the pie.


We talked seriously to him after eating, and Elder Kodriov bore a really powerful testimony of our calling and our message. I almost physically felt the power of the gift of discernment and I recognized how every time he felt the spirit, he dismissed it. He was trying to deflect the conversation towards the pie and how tasty it was. He asked where the word ‘hebrew’ comes from, we promised to answer in our next meeting. Sundays he’s too busy going to his Russian Orthodox church to come to our meeting and see for himself.


1/18/09
Masha and Anya both came to church today, both under the impression that it was someone’s last Sunday. With transfers being postponed… they’ll have to come next week for the very same reason, right? Artyom and Zhenya were fairly reserved, so Masha could focus on the lessons, and church members really helped out with that too.


Sister Gregory gave a really good talk about why she’s grateful for being a member of the church. She talked about the blessings, about Alice in Wonderland and how we, unlike Alice, know where we want to end up, so the Lord helps us in choosing our paths.


After church, we went up north to the Sulimovy family in Kimri. We had a little sacrament meeting with them, just their family, and a lesson about service and missionary work. It was apparent that we brought a boost, and how great it was to see how happy they were to se eand have us. Dasha has moved back in and is working as a Megaphone desk lady at one of those booths in the supermarket. She worked today, scared her boss would get made because of poor sales Saturday and only sold 2 SIM cards. Learned the hard way that it’s just better to follow the commandments and trust that th eLord will make things right. Gave them a poster of the first presidency.


1/19/09
P-day, news from home. Seth and Elizabeth’s baby is a boy! The first VanDerwerken great grandson and the first grandson for mom and dad. Aaron avenged the family against Coach A and Centennial with a 20 point performance in a 15 point victory.


Shopping, got hosed, a 500 gram block of butter labeled 50 roubles rung up at 111! Atak just makes it too easy to buy what isn’t exactly necessary.


Stayed home writing letters to Grandma and Grandpa and practicing the harmonica. In the evening we had a meeting with Valentina and Larisa. Valentina still hasn’t gotten an answer to her prayers about the church and Joseph Smith. I shared my testimony and Mission Quest experience, after having Sister Larisa share how she came into the church. The spirit was strong, and Valentina wants to find out, it’s just hard for her to remember everything we teach. I felt the distinct prompting, twice, that in our next lesson, we should talk about the priesthood and offer to give her a blessing.


Interesting experience, earlier we bought an avocado at the store, because Elder Kodirov has never had an avocado before. We tried it, it was disgusting - exotic fruit my eye! Elder Kodriov tried to eat the pit at first. He bit it before I had the chance to tell him that you don’t eat the pit. It was hard, and tasted so bad, so we threw it away. At Sister Larisa’s, we had a salad with avocado in it, and it was good! The avocado was soft, we just hadn’t picked a ripe one. The same situation with bananas. She told us how she had friends who bought a bunch of green bananas when they first appeared in the USSR, tried them, were disgusted and didn't buy them for years, until finding out what a difference waiting makes. Gospel principle application for sure!


1/20/09
A little bit of a riff between Elder Kodirov and I during companionship study. He told me that from his study of the Doctrine and Covenants, he knows that life in the Celestial Kingdom will be at a very high temperature. I laughed, because it’s ridiculous, and it really didn’t sit well with him. He got offended / hurt / mad / disappointed because it was treasured information I was laughing at. I couldn’t help it, it’s like saying that God reveals the marital status of Christ to you if you desire, study, and pray long enough for it. Some things just aren’t revealed like that… or maybe I”m lacking in faith. I know that God could reveal it, and I guess He does, if He wants to for His own purposes. I just start to wonder, when we’ve been instructed to keep such things sacred and you have a companion who says that people in his district told him how the Adamic language sounds and that God has spoken to them in it!


Culture night, lunch at Pizza Hut and then the Museum at Victory Park, WWII with some amazing stuff. A hall with chains hanging from the ceiling, representing the 27 million Russian people who died in WWII, with 2.6 million bronze crystal pendants. They had dioramas of the larger battles and events of the war. The defense of Moscow, blockade at Leningrad, etc.


Giant swords (like Goliath’s would be) made in honor of the veterans, an art gallery in the big wings of the 4th floor. Stalin’s work desk, the desk where some treaty was signed among the allies, etc.


Definitely a big part of Russian culture, WWII, incredible how much blood was spilt to preserve their Motherland and how much they endured. The Leningrad blockade, every citizen was given 125 grams of bread to live on daily, for 900 days, 2 years and 5 months under siege.


A special reverence and spirit there, in a museum like that, lots of work to be done for those who gave their lives for their country, homes, and families.


— An additional word on last week’s Almaty visa trip —
Quite an unforgettable experience. I don’t think I’ve felt so much pressure, stress, or the need to pray at any other time of my mission or life. Relax, ha! That was about the last thing we did.


Again, the overwhelming feelings of emotion were unprecedented in my life so far. The miracle of Maksim picking up Monday night, and being in Almaty! Then the let down of agency as he didn’t show Tuesday, and how Yegor stopped answering my calls. Vitali’s absence was a let down, but he should be back in April. Feelings of jealousy subsided, Elder Burgess was much more well remembered, but who served a full year there, and left only 4 months ago), as I remembers the lesson I learned over a year ago that how a missionary is remembered has no effect on the service he actually rendered, or on how the Lord remembers that service. I began to simply rejoice at the positive, the growth, Marat’s baptism, Miran’s acquaintance (he’s close to baptism) and how the feeling in the branch was up, the spirit strong, despite Bakhtyor’s crazy talk about beauty and money.


1/21/09
We should have had a split today, but the zone leaders missed the last train out to Lobnya before the break, so it didn’t happen.


We had a fairly successful contacting spat, with a few contacts and well-placed brochures and invitations. It took us a few hours, but we find the source of the stench wreaking up our apartment. Two nights ago, our fridge went the whole night without being on. The outlet that our fridge and washing machine work on stopped working, so we’re running an extension cord from the little ‘hall’. The problem is, we’re one outlet short for the music, microwave, washer, fridge, fan over the range, etc. So we usually switch the fridge out for the fan when cooking, then switch back. Only problem… we forgot that the ice that accumulated around the freezer half full of meat that our landlady is storing here, melted. Bloody ice has leaked down into the fridge system, rotted with the temperature and stunk up the place! We moved the fridge, tipped it, and most of the sour, bloody water poured out onto the floor. We cleaned it up, t-shirt over the mouth and rubber gloves in hand.


Our landlady was a good sport about it, everything’s out on the balcony now (our food), so we have a walk in fridge at the moment, until we get the fridge completely thawed and cleaned up.


Valentin wasn’t at work, so we started tracting a nearby building. Had a reminder from the Holy Ghost about going to the ‘cult!’ lady, because Elder Kodirov thinks we should. We went, leaving that building immediately, but she wasn’t home. Her daughter answered, looked way confused about why we, two young men, dressed in black w/name tags) were asking for her mom!


We’re going to have some sort of meeting Friday with the whole mission. No one knows what about! Craziness.


1/22/09
Followed up on a tracting contact. She wasn’t home, so we contacted around, picked up our ‘Magnolia’ magazine discount card (finally) and caught the 12:30 into Moscow for district meeting at the Gregories. Talked to a Muslim guy from Kurskaya province on the train, but he wasn’t all that interested in talking. 


We had lunch, bean and ham / meat soup, from the Gregories… really good. Then district meeting about retaining new members by helping them exercise faith and getting involved in church organizations. Family history, helping teach investigators, callings, etc.


Went into the office after that. The sister have apparently already been transferred and there will be a pair helping us out in Lobnya! With Anya, Masha and Nelly, but based in Timuryazevskaya. Got some needed stuff down, Christmas card from Uncle Jay, news from Elder Price that Yura got laid off because of the crisis, moved back to Belarus and is living with Grandma. I’m going to get permission from President Cranney to email him once a month.


Late for English Club. No worries, taught sports words and the verbs of motion, all about the big dance!


1/23/09
Got a phone call from the zone leaders this morning, our big unknown meeting at 12:30pm was canceled. WE did a normal study, cleaned a little, got in some contacting, talked to some old guy for a long time.


Lunch, leftover chili and a really good fruit salad. I’ve gotten pretty skilled at splitting apples in half with my bare hands over the past few days. Thanks, a little shout out to Brent Allen.


Weekly planning, our resident babushka landlady interrupting to clean up a little more with the fridge. Returned to planning, discussed how each missionary has his own talents, strengths, and the Lord has called him with the intent to make the best of those talents. That we should be confident in being ourselves, and not in trying to imitate other, ‘better’ missionaries. You’re called as a representative of Jesus Christ, not of Elder So and So, your trainer, or mission president.


Friday night ‘activity’ was puzzle night. Masha and Anya are planning on Sunday! 


Phone call from the APs, today’s canceled meeting is back on for tomorrow, at 9am, in the office! Every missionary, from Lyubertsi, Moscow, us, and others on the phone will be there. Wow, it must be something.


1/24/09 - Mission boundary change
The big news…
Lyubertsi, Reutov and Zelenograd listened by phone, along with Yarslovl, Nizhni, and Kazakhstan.


Opening prayer from Elder Kulikovsky, and then President Cranney revealed the big news, after receiving permission from the Area Presidency and First Presidency, the boundaries of the Moscow Mission and Moscow West Missions have changed. Moscow, our mission, is no bounded by the the whole Moscow province… and the Moscow West mission is the outer cities. That is, Yarslovl, Nizhni, and Kazakhstan are part of that mission, and we get the whole south of Moscow. Transfers were announced as well, we’re looking at the start of a two week transition period as one Moscow West missionary will be paired up with one Moscow missionary in those areas to be switching missions. At the end of the two weeks, the change will be complete and we won’t lose any missionaries from our missions.


I’m going to be an AP, so I got thrown in right when it’ll be the funnest! Coordinating everything, along with the new SIM cards.


Now I’ve got some security for the next two transfers, knowing I”ll be in Khimki as an AP. What with all the mid-transfers we’ll be going through in the coming months, that’s a big plus. I’ll be two as AP, and then my final transfer will be somewhere else, within the Moscow province.


Elder Angelo is coming to pair up with Elder Kodirov here in Lobnya, Elder Earl is into the office and Dolgoprudny is closed after tomorrow.


We lose the Vincents, Monsoons, and McLellands to the West mission, which is a real bummer. Now all the missionaries will be in Moscow all the time, with the exceptions of Zelenograd, Lobnya, Mitishi, Reutov, and Podalsk (on the south of Moscow, a suburb like Lobnya).


Came home, stunned, ate lunch, and did some packing, then personal study.


During personal study, we got a ring at our doorbell. Elder Kodirov answered the door, a lady from Kirby vacuums wanted to offer us the chance of having our carpet or one piece of furniture being cleaned. Elder Kodirov persuaded me to agree, and 15 minutes later, Zhenya, a 27 year old single guy from Moldova with a piercing in his ear came in. All energetic and geared up to give us his spiel. As he displayed the capabilities of the Kirby system, we got to know him and he got to know us as missionaries. At the end of his $4000 vacuum demonstration, we sat down and gave him a 10 minute first lesson, prayed, gave him a Book of Mormon, and he said he would read it and pray about it. He left his #, but lives in Moscow, on the purple line.


Interesting how the Lord leads us to them, or them to us!


1/25/09
Nikolay Kharlamov and his son, Volodya, were at church today. Opened at 8:30am for them. President Cranney came with Sister Cranney, along with Sister Nartova and Gorina.


Anya, Masha, Nelly, and Valentina were all there. President Cranney had me come up and bear my testimony after Elder Earl finished his talk about the Plan of Salvation.


We all took pictures after church, yeah, woopdy doo. Although it was pleasant ot hear everyone not wanting me to leave, for whatever reason (finish the puzzle, English club, etc.)


Went over to Tamara’s to say goodbye. A little Christmas reading spiritual thought, some ‘white tea’, boiled hot water (Elder Kodirov’s personal invention) and she gave me a babushka goodbye kiss. Culturally, I couldn’t not do it, or she would have been insulted, so I let her kiss me on the cheek. I gave her ‘Our Heritage’ as a gift.


We then grabbed the tvorog pie we baked earlier and took it to Larisa and Valentina, along with a poster of the First Presidency. Taught a lesson about the priesthood, Valentina accepted our offer to give a blessing. Promised, she was that when she is ready to act on the answer she will receive, she will receive it. She said she would be baptized if she got an answer! Discussed the possibility of going to church once a month in Nizhni Novgorod when/if she moves back. Sister Larisa had her back in why she couldn’t go, amazingly. Despite all of Larisa’s ‘help’, she flat out said we were rushing when Elder Kodirov, by impression, asked Valentina about a baptismal date. We promised blessings and the spirit was strong. LEft without a date, but with significant progress and a step closer to her entering the fold.


Sister Larisa gave me a going away apple pie with chocolates. It was really good.


1/26/09 - Khmiki: Clint Burgess
Took all the bags and luggage to Khimki straight from Lobnya, after an unsuccessful Eggos and hashbrowns, and then went down to the transfer meeting. Elders Despain and McKay are going to Kazakhstan, which I’m happy for. Elder Pollard and Williams are Belarussian pillars apparently, and Elder Trevor Terrel is AP with Despain for the moment.


All the changes happened, we met up at the office for a big old brainstorming session, trying to come up with everything we need to be working on and in what order of importance. We got a lot of stuff to do, a lot of work to be done with the boundary change.
* New SIM cards for the cell phones
* Zone Leader Conference
* Mission Conference with President Pieper
* All the branch records to get (new branches) and map out
* Apartment inventories
* Etc. etc. etc.


Wrote home, Aaron had a game winning 3 at Eagle, the #4 team in the state at the moment. Too bad I won’t be able to see him play.


Bought 1500 roubles worth of groceries, kiwi and ‘mom’s fruit pie’ tea.


Crazy phone calling as ‘zone leaders’ for the south zone, from arrival to the apartment until bed.


1/27/09
Study, into the office to do stats for my first time. Took forever, but got it done. Had a little meeting with President, gave him a blessing (Elder Burgess as voice), because he’s feeling pretty overwhelmed himself with the ecclesiastical implications of a border change and two district presidents being released and new branch presidencies being organized!


Unfortunately, I can’t remember (I’m writing this Saturday, the 31st) and Elder Burgess won’t let me read his journal for Tuesday night, so it will have to suffice.


1/28/09
Made it to district meeting in the west mission office on Sportivnaya (metro stop). On the way, I met Dima in the metro, a young man in his 20s, who asked about my tag and church. He’s got a wife, they moved from another part of Russia and he wants to get the Book of Mormon. He asked, “how can I get this book?” We’ll see how that turns out!


Found out from Elder Terrell all about that area, the bottom of the red line, then we booked it over to the central building to be with the Arbatsky missionaries. Met their branch mission leader, Victor, who served a mission in England. There appears to be work to be done there, along with the largest branch in our mission (110 per week about).


From that meeting, we went to the service center to sort things out with the new SIM cards. Our mission is going to a corporate plan that’ll all be on BeeLine and controlled by President Cranney. We’re still getting the payments and glitches worked out.


From there, we were back to Novokuznetskaya for lunch / dinner, some rolls, and I gave Elder Burgess the whole lay out as far as Rebecca Forbush is concerned.


English club with the west mission leading, we stayed around and had a good gander at everything, talked with people about it all. Elder Randall and Fickland are looking into the options for English Club in the future, and they’ll be presenting some ideas at ZLC. 


Nightly phone calls with the south district leaders.


1/29/09
District meeting with Kakhovsky and Podalsk Elders on Kashirskaya building. Got the info and stuff we needed and headed out.


Elder Burgess made the suggestions that, between each of these district meetings, we should stop one person and talk to them. We traveled up to Novokuznetskaya, bought lavash for the tacos we’d be having with the Tagansky elders.


Coming out of Ramstor, we stopped and talked to a Sergei, he was fairly open and interested. We got his contact and started to continue on when we realized we were 3 seconds from our building, and he works nearby, so we offered to show him the building. We showed him Christ’s appearance to the Nephites and the first vision (paintings), and gave him a Book of Mormon. He went his way to finish his lunch break, and we went on to the kitchen for taco lunch with the Tagansky district. Elders Lemon and Jonovich with west companions Baxter and Whitney. Got their area info and input and marked activity list.


Now it was time to ‘return and report’. We were back into the office, trying the cell phones (still not working), getting the lists to Elder Baysinger to update Google Earth. Talked with President about transfers a little bit, made a write up of the areas and missionary work in the branches. Locked up the office, got caught in a traffic jam and then made it home on time!


1/30/09
After study, fruit salad. Planning of ZLC and Mission Conference. Lots of discussion, praying, thinking, and somehow, just as draining, if not more, than physical work.


We planned ZC and ZLC, then ate some grilled cheese sandwiches, right up till our meeting with Artur. He speaks some English, used to be an English teacher. Lives in a dorm here in Khimki. Elder Burgess kind of lost his cool, but he’s not the kind to freak out, he just sat in disbelief and then asked some weird questions. We testified to him about repentance, read Jesus’s words about coming to save the sinners, just like a physician to the sick. Encouraged him to read the Book of Mormon. WE’ve got a plan to call him everyday / make some kind of daily contact with him.


Ended up walking / contacting home, good to get some fresh air after having been inside for a number of days for the past week.


1/31/09
Cleaned up our apartment and sat down to plan for our area (Khimki). Planned out our efforts to keep daily contact with Vladimir (the infamous) and with Artur. We’re also going to try and work with the Milner family in getting their family active. The dad, Semyon, is semi-active, and get his 16 year old daughter into the waters of baptism.


After planning, we made chicken alfredo, with the help of Seth & Elizabeth’s package, but discovered that our milk had spoiled. We went out for a quick stop at the little milk product trailer / stand right outside our building. As we were standing in line, a babushka with obviously orange dyed hair poking out from under her shapka stood staring at my name tage. She started to go off on me a little bit, asking what church we were. When I said Christian, she just said “What’s that? We’ve got Orthodox, Catholic, Protestant… Christian? What’s that supposed to mean?” 


“We believe in and worship the Lord Jesus Christ.” 
“Well, Jesus was Orthodox” very matter-of-factly stated it. Found out we were Americans, coming here to ‘force our religion on Russia.’ I wanted to walk, but Elder Burgess just kind of started shooting the breeze with her. She wouldn’t let us stop by or anything, but by the end, she was commenting on how we ‘clean boys’ stood out from the Russians. And this other lady, not quite a babushka yet, probably 50s, went off on her (from the line at the milk stand) about there being good Russian youth like us and not everyone in America or in Europe is like us. Went off on her, they had a yelling match, then the 50 year old walked off and we just stood, stunned. WE broke off from our new babushka friend, returned home to finish lunch and then tracted a building. One opened door to finish out the night.


2/1/09
First to the Sunday morning session of the Moscow West District Conference. A new district president, Yuri Baukov. Got to see and get acquainted with more of the west district saints, sat by Elder Price and Zhenya, a guy who they met on the train coming in and he just came with them to the conference! (a weirdo)


Great spirit at the conference… later we had our own Rechnoy branch meeting. The branch is just about the same, maybe a little bigger than Sokolniki. We had 15 missionaries there! Yeah… 9 elders are currently assigned to Rechnoy, and we’ll hopefully move it down to 7 or 6 by next Monday. Masha from Yaroslavl was there, a convert that Sister Pinkal found and she was leaving the next day for the MTC!


The branch is similar to Sokolniki. Unfortunately there is a friendly atmosphere lacking, although our branch mission leader, Boris, is money. 


Got home from church just in time to eat.


2/2/09
Got my 2nd letter from Becca this week, so I wrote a response while sitting in the barbershop line, waiting for Elder Burgess.


Another good game from Aaron back home, hitting crunch 3s in overtime, etc.


Went over to president’s house around 7pm to go over things (ZLC the next day, transfers, mission conference coming up). Got things mostly sorted out, and had family night with the Cranneys, played scum, at really good leftovers. Then called it a night!


2/3/09
Early morning, 5:15am to shower, get ready, eat breakfast, and be out the door at 7am (Sister Cranney made waffles).


In the office, finalized our training, looked at transfers a little more and then had our ZLC.


Sister Cranney’s training highlighted teaching methods, using Elder Mendenhall as an example, telling the Brother of Jared story while drawing it on the white board, employing some of his acting skills. It was quite entertaining and memorable.


Discussed and discussed and discussed English club to death. Then our training about being teachable and learning from other missionaries. We recollected our first transfers and how we learned by imitating our trainers / other missionaries. I told about my first experience in sharing the gospel in Russia, on the bus from Rosinka to Tushinskaya, and how the man (slightly drunk), threw Elder Jarvis’s Book of Mormon out the door, and then how Elder Hancock showed Elder Berlin and myself how to contact at Red Square. Elder Burgess talked about seeing Elder JArvis and how we reacted to the whole thing with patience and without flinching.


We brought in Sister Payne from ‘The District’ as our guest speaker, ‘if you think you’ve arrived, you’re in big trouble… ha, ha, ha, there is no arrival.’


Talked about Moses learning from Jethro as an example of being teachable (Exodus 18).


President Cranney talked about the gifts of the spirit and introduced our theme verse for zone conference, Joshua 3:5. “Sanctify yourselves, for tomorrow the Lord will work wonders among you.”


Ended with prayer, song, pizza. Stats and other stuff, got out late and came home.


Talked to Artur on the phone today. His questions… reading in bible, what’s circumcision for? Why a stone blade? (Moses sons) Are church members circumcised or not? Wow, it’s a riot to talk with Artur!


2/4/09
We thought we finally had a day without going to the office, when we realized that we had to get the cell phone stuff ready and stats sent to church HQ, and to branch presidents. So we hopped down to the service center and got the rest of the SIM cards and all the instructions written up for setting answering machines and what not, and then allocating #s to companionships.


It was really funny at the service center, how Sergei Baev, the guy who did the whole cell phone thing for us, the 2nd counselor in the Moscow West District, had an envelope for President Podsablaev, the Moscow District President. But he wouldn’t give it to him, he held it in the air behind the desk, repeating one word, “Dance! Dance!” He was giggling and President Podsablaev refused, so he just walked back up stairs without getting his envelope!


Elder Yorgensen stuck around the office to let us back in after going to the service center. He was on the computer using a program called “Rosetta Stone” to practice Russian when we got back. He had questions about the words “vozmi” and “voshla” and I had to explain that they’re irregular conjugates and what not, and it reminded me how difficult this language is to grasp at first.


In the metro, Elder Burgess and one man he talked to helped a man get up and get help. It was a BOMZH, a homeless person, with a way messed up right side of his face. All swollen like elephantitis in the lip and the color purple. They helped him up into the Rechnoy Vokzal entry way and we got the police and they came to help him. WE continued on, and Elder Burgess talked to the guy forever, we passed the office, but they kept on talking. Elder Burgess stopped him eventually, threw down the gauntlet, and Ilya just told him that maybe the meeting was from God for his (Elder Burgess’s) benefit.


I’m getting to know the bus ride from Rechnoy to Khimki and vice versa very well.


2/5/09
So much talking / discussing / planning / phone calls. Artur cancelled our meeting. Elder Burgess spent the greater part of 1.5 hours on the phone, trying to find mini-missionaries and also a member for our 6pm with Sergei, the man we showed the church building to last Thursday. Came to Andrei, a 16 year old priest, way cool kid, after about 10-12 calls, and he was a maybe. I did our manual washing machine as he called. We went to a member, Valentina Belenkaya, she’s living in a retirement home by Ashan, lived in Zelenograd and is still a good member. Sound in her thinking at least. The only weird thing, was when we offered to bring the sacrament on Sunday, she was kind of indifferent to it. She said that God knows us, our state / position / conditions, so I think she doesn’t think she’ll be judged for not partaking because she physically cannot make the trip to Novokuznetskaya or Zelenograd. Interesting, she made us pray in English, after having prayed in Russian, because she loves the sound of English speech.


Before hopping on the bus down to the retirement home, Elder Burgess was getting the thought / idea to move our meeting to tomorrow to try and get Elder Gavrilov or Chemezov there on a split. He just couldn’t tell, from the spirit or a random thought. We decided to make the decision after coming out of Valentina’s. WE were there on the street, debating as we walked, when Andrei called and said he could make it. Our decision made for us, we went in to Novokuznetskaya.


Andrei’s first time accompanying the missionaries at a lesson, and he did a good job of testifying of prayer with reading the Book of Mormon. I shared a little bit of Joseph Smith’s life, based on the whisperings of the spirit. The spirit was there, but somehow our words were falling on hard-of-hearing ears. At the end, after 3 or 4 times explaining that we pray with our own words, Sergei offered the Lord’s prayer to end the lesson. Oh well, Elder Gavrilov will help him out with that!


2/6/09
Met with Artur, he basically recited the 3rd and 4th chapters of 1st Nephi to us from memory, we drank shipovnik tea and discussed a few principles of the chapters with him: obedience, guidance of the spirit, etc. We encouraged him to keep reading and we’re looking for New Testament references to tithing. The thought came, they had law of consecration, is there a need for tithing?


Went to the office for district meeting with the Rechnoy district, all-time hugest district (11 missionaries in total). Some good thoughts and inspiration thanks to Elder Barney’s training. Ate some blini, courtesy of Elder Prete.


As Elder Burgess said, we started out the day not knowing Anton, and by the end of the day, he was walking us home after having paid for some tea in the Russian House cafe next to our house.


Elder Burgess sat down next to him on the bus on our way to Artur’s, they exchanged phone numbers and kind of agreed on a meeting at night.


We got back from district meeting, and I was feeling pretty drained physically and mentally. Took a 20 minute nap that felt like 3 minutes, then we cooked up a nice hearty soup of chicken, potato, corn, onion, peas, tomato paste, and green beans.


Ate the soup, feeling better and we decided to check up on a contact, address only, from Elder Neipp.


We came to the 5th stairwell, building 4, street Molodyozhnaya, stop 2B. A man left through the door, and we slipped in past him to find a younger couple opening the door to apartment 38. We ask for Sergey, and they tell us he  just passed us going out, the one with the shovel. Outside, Sergey can’t for the life of him remember talking to Elder Neipp or even giving his address out to anybody. We talked as he shoveled snow out from around the wheels of his car, and he was just in shock. We gave him a tri-fold and told him that if he remembered anything, to call. Pretty sure he must have been punch drunk when he talked to Elder Neipp!


Bussed up to street druzhba (friendship), our stop, and met Anton, the guy from earlier that day on the bus. His mother-in-law was at home, so he escaped and thought it better to sit down and talk in a cafe or something.


We sat and talked over fruit tea, just about life. He’s an officer in the army, although he couldn’t be older than 25, and a lawyer. His wife is an accountant and specialist in metal ‘selling’, with two advanced degrees. We talked about Joseph Smith, gave him a Book of Mormon and Family: Proclamation to the World. Sunday night sounds like we’ll be going to his place to meet the wife, Zhenya and daughter, Vlada, who is 7 months. Anton is just one of those energetic, without guild, sincere people. Refreshing to sit and talk and share with him!


It’s the whole up and down roller coaster of life which helps us really enjoy and savor those moments of joy and peace we get blessed with every so often.


2/7/09
Another day of miracles, but this one with slightly less disappointment as well! Got in a full study and had about 1 hour to contact before coming back for planning and for lunch. We decided the night before to do a little exploring in the area where Anton lives.


We set off, talked with a few people here and there, and then came upon a ‘highway’, we saw a family on the other side. Dad, mom, and small son, with a sled, heading towards a hill. We took chase after them and at the top of the hill, we barely arrived to see papa and son go down on their red disc. We watched as their path crossed the way in front of many parents and grandparents playing with young children. We were in a fairly new park. Tried one family, rejection, then came around to another side of the little park and found them.


Olga stood at one end of a teeter-totter, and Kira sat on the other end. Igor sat on the stone embankment, on top of the red plastic sled that Kira was dragged to the park on, and would later be dragged home on.


We started talking with Igor, they aren’t religious, at all. But the nicest and most openly friendly people I’ve met in Russia. From Novosibirsk, they’ve lived in Kurkina (found out that we went beyond our city / area limits!) for 4 years for work. But at the moment, because of the crisis, he’s basically without work. We talked about our service and choice to serve missions, about God, Olga asked what it means to be ‘believing’ and what difference is there between having good principles and having faith. A little talk about Christ, the Atonement, and repentance.


Ira, the 15 year old daughter, showed up and started playing with Kira. We gave them a Book of Mormon, a Family Proclamation, exchanged phone numbers and parted ways with an invitation standing to come as guests!


To put it lightly, we were elated! After the leftover soup, we set down to planning and replaced the ‘pray for a new family’ sign on the wall with ‘pray for two families: (1) Anton, Zhenya, Vlada and (2) Igor, Olga, Ira, and Kira’ and the verse DC 93:51 “by your prayer of faith, with one consent I will uphold them”


No time for planning Tuesday’s training, so we booked it to Novokuznetskaya to meet Ivan and his friend, Mikhail, for the Saturday evening session of District Conference. We met a young kid, 20 years old, in the bus who some time ago saw Elder Briggs nametag here in Khimki, never talked to him, but remembers reading his tag!


Ivan and Mikhail were waiting just at the top of the escalator at Novokuznetskaya, we were 30 minutes late because we got stuck in traffic around Rechnoy Vokzal on the bus. We made it all right, got good seats, and a copy of the Book of Mormon for both of our Moldovan brethren. They live in Mitishi, so we introduced them and passed them to Elder Morgan after hearing several talks about strengthening the family and about families in general.


Elder Mikulin’s talk was especially powerful and spiritual. He’s President Mikulin’s (of the Sokolniki branch) dad. 


Ivan said afterwards, that when he first met the missionaries, he looked up our church website that they gave him, but that was not all. He also looked at some anti stuff, so he came to the meeting with an already skewed perspective. But the meeting and spirit of the meeting changed all that. He found out the truth and that none of that trash written about us is true.


We spent the night in Sokolniki with Elders Berlin, Kozirov, Morgan, and Warren.


2/8/09
Big old problem, the experience, blessings, miracles, etc. are being thrown at us, running 100 miles an hour, waking up at 5:30am, skipping lunch, and only sitting down to recording it all two days after!


Super thin ‘yorkshire pudding’ was Elder Taylor’s attempt at feeding the crowd, scraping the depths of a paper thin breakfast casserole.


At district conference, as Elder Burgess and I already knew from President Cranney’s unnoticed slip-of-the-tongue a week or so back (not to mention being in the office a week earlier, having President Cranney confide in us that the district conferences were to change both District Presidents and then seeing President Mikulin and wife go in, together, for an interview and come out as if they’d seen a ghost.


President Podsablaev was released, President Nichiporov has been called as a mission president, and President Mikulin was called as the new District President with President Rabotnikov (from Zelenograd) and President Sandgren (Rechnoy) as counselors. Didn’t realize how much I enjoy hearing him speak, and the combination of him and his dad speaking in the same meeting was so powerful. He’s the man who the Lord has prepared for the bringing forth of miracles in Moscow. He and his wife were invited to come to Moscow 5 years ago as part of work, expecting to stay for 1.5 years, they’ve now become at home in Moscow, as a branch president in Sokolniki and now as a district president.


Missionary meeting with Boris left us with time to go to one meeting before coming home and planning Tuesday’s mission conference training. Anton got called to work, but we remembered the man who called us, Genadi, who had met with Elders Gavrilov and Randall twice before getting sick. He was sick for about a month and then he called us up earlier in the week, having read all of the literature Elder Gavrilov gave him and said ‘Let Gavrilov come visit as a guest!’


He met us on the first floor, his apartment (on an upper floor, honestly I can’t recall) was dark and cluttered, but with an old soviet homey kind of atmosphere.


One lamp lit in the room, besides the kitchen to the left where he set the tea pot. Dimly illuminating the many pamphlets, brochures, and books on religious topics, all strewn about his small coffee table. Our Joseph Smith pamphlet, along with the Book of Mormon itself were included, as well as “What does the bible really teach?” from the Jehovah’s Witnesses, and a Russian Orthodox book or two.


We drank some fruit tea, prayed and talked, introducing ourselves and getting a better feel for what he believes and what he had talked about with Elders Gavriolv and Randall.


He really loved the Book of Mormon and said he could believe that Joseph Smith saw God the Father and Jesus the Son. But the consequences of that belief are obviously not quite understood yet. We talked about the apostasy, and as I taught and testified, I received a personal witness myself as the words of DC 84:85 and DC 100:6. The words I spoke were not my own, I just put them out the same as I heard them coming into my mind. And although Genadi didn’t really grasp the concept of which we taught, I know that the spirit was present and that he felt it.


We helped him formulate his own prayer, using his own words, for the closing prayer. First time he, with his own words, prayed. Except maybe the one time when he was living in northern Russia, in the Baikal region, uttered a ‘Lord save me!’ We might be in for a game of chess next time!


2/9/09
Transfer day! My first time leading any kind of meeting as an AP. Most were happy with it, with two or three exceptions. Oh well.


President and Sister Cranney gave us a ride to Sokol from Novokuznetskaya and we talked. Found out that the new west district president actually lives in the Moscow district, near Rechnoy Vokzal! A little too late for that now! He’s pretty adamant about keeping English club, seeing as he is an English club convert. So we are probably not going to be canceling it altogether.


Email’s brought not much new. Although really good to hear from Mom, Dad, Aaron, Amanda, and Seth on a weekly basis now.


Can’t find a good portable pull-up bar in Russia, and you have to drop 1200 to 1300 roubles on groceries a week in this companionship!


MAde it home in time to write Sister Cutler a response, including a picture doing our wash. Then we spent the rest of the night preparing for mission conference, including ordering 30 pizzas and in teaching Elder Burgess how to handle pushy pizza order takers.


2/10/09
Another 5:30am day, to make it to Novokuznetskaya in time to set up. Everything set, President Pieper arrived a few minutes late, and we got underway right when he arrived. Lucky for the two companionships that showed up just before him. 


He started the conference, after announcements and whatnot, with a talk where we weren’t to write anything down, no notes. He wanted us to be focused on listening and envisioning, instead of copying it all down. He talked about the number of church members in comparison to the world. ⅕ of 1%, or 0.002%, are members of the church. If we scale that to Moscow, a city of roughly 15 million, we come out with 30k church members, according to the world average. We’re currently sitting at 2k, with 60 as the work force to bring those remaining 28k souls.


President Pieper read the prophecy Elder Holland made about Moscow, when he visited and spoke in a hall filled with about 300 church members. He said that in his lifetime, he would return to Moscow when 100 of the same halls wouldn’t hold the saints. That they’d be standing in the halls, no room to sit, etc. President Pieper asked, 300 saints filling 100 halls, how many is that? He waited one moment, Elder Gallo’s more than audible ‘OH!’ breaking the silence… “are you getting a picture of what the Lord has in store for Moscow? 30k, that’s 10 stakes, that’s some miracle power for sure.”


Then President Mikulin spoke to us about the work, and about his family. He talked about not underestimating what we’re doing, and talked about how the seeds we plant and the people who are baptized spread out from Moscow and take the gospel to all the world. It’s an unofficial statistic, but some say that the number of people who are in Moscow on a daily basis reaches 30 million, with all the commuters and unregistered people. That’s a lot of people for 60 missionaries.


President Boyko expressed his support of an English Club, personally being an English club convert, and talked about us helping the church members in becoming friends with investigators.


Zone training was sharing what we learned from a companion during our missions, and a specific story with that. Elder Chemezov, Sister Brown, and Elder Neipp talked about power & authority in that being manifest, and how they’ve come to that (what they’ve done to be worthy of it) the temple, worthiness interviews, and received endowments of power from on high. Then read how the Nephites were sanctified and received power in Helaman 3:35. “Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord”, why?


Then the big finale, had them close their eyes and remember when they had participated in a baptism or to imagine their investigators in white clothing at baptism or going through the temple… all the while we took off our outer layer of clothes to reveal ourselves in white (baptismal / temple clothing). They opened their eyes and saw us, standing in white. WE told them to remember their whites, when teaching and contacting, etc. Their own covenants, and the covenants that they’re helping investigators prepare for.


Musical #, armies of Helaman, acapella, then testimonies of leaving missionaries. Elder Shephards’ (a senior brother) was especially poignant for me. They’ve had two return-missionary sons take a step back from the church during their mission… who bore testimonies just as strongly as those born before. Be on your guard, he said, pray, study the scriptures, and share that precious testimony you have right now.


Sister Cranney about the battle of Jericho, us marching around Moscow 7 times! Our battle plan is a little different, it’s Preach My Gospel.


PResident Cranney about Zion’s camp, especially when we have little time until we’ll have lost 15 missionaries by mid-April and 8 more by the end of May (with our group).


PResident Pieper then finished our conference off by asking us to take some time to sit, ponder, pray for and seek revelation and then act according to that which we receive.


Pizza, chaos with the SIM cards, and answering machines. WE just ended up taking them all without answering machines set, went up to the office, sent statistics into church HQ, set most of the answering machines and called it a day. Three contacts today, the Lord really is blessing us as we have little time to find, so we're getting really good conversations with people on transport (metro and magical bus 443 from Rechnoy Vokzal to Khimki and our house).


2/11/09
Made some phone calls. Just one of those days when you feel worthless! That is, after several hours in the office, putting money on the phones, troubleshooting, etc.


But from 6 to 8pm, a whole nother story. Our meeting with Igor, Olga, Ira and Kira. We came to the building, a nice new building. We called the security, because their phone intercom didn’t work. The security guard was a filipino lady, who tried to tell us that they weren’t home, just as Ira came down to meet us. :) Way nice apartment, like a step into America. Leather couches, huge widescreen TV. TV in the kitchen, big rooms.


We had tea, they let us pray over the tea, compote and cakes, we brought lemon bars. As we talked, it was clear she had read up on us online, quite a bit. Read about Joseph Smith, the priesthood to blacks, tithing, temples (luckily nothing about what goes on there, nothing sacred). She asked about Nephi cutting off Laban’s head, but she looked throughout the rest of the book and he was never punished!


Pretty difficult to get our two cents in, she’s a talker, and Igro sat quietly. Every once in a while coming in with his comments and Ira just sat the whole time. Elder Burgess offered our experiment, to have them read the Book of Mormon for one week, and to pray about it every day. Then, next Wednesday, we can meet and find out what they think. If there’s any change. Olga and Ira agreed, but Igor wouldn’t promise anything. So we’ll see how they react to the reception of the word of God. The Lord works miracles through the Book of Mormon!


2/12/09
Genadi was no match for my reckless, rusty attack. Queen to H5! Took out an investigator in our first game of chess, but fell to the older, more experienced in our second bout.


He had a little alcohol in him, so we were just going to play, pray, and be on our way. But he had questions. “What kind of hard drive does God have? To be able to remember and love billions of people?”


“I know that we all should think about and love him, but I was just wondering how that works in the opposite direction?”


He’s still reading the Book of Mormon, and he offered a prayer of his own words, which showed great improvement over last meeting’s prayer. He wants to come to church on Sunday and we’ll do our best to get him there. He also wants us to meet one of his daughters the next time we meet. Don’t worry, they’re all grown and married he says!


Healer lady wasn’t home, stopped by an Armenian family and the spirit just wouldn’t let either of us feel good about being there. We chatted for about 5 minutes and then left. No buildings stood out to us in old Khimki, so we took a bus back to the new Khimki and found a building near our house, and tracted into Nikolai. A shirtless man in his 60s, let us in and we chatted about him, his wife, us, and religion. His dog, Danna, is just about the most pettable dog ever.


He agreed to let us come back tomorrow to pray with him. His only ‘religion’ growing up was seeing his grandma one night, at 2 o’clock in the morning, in the corner on her knees, whispering a prayer.


Pretty excited about going back at 11am to talk to him more!


2/13/09
Obviously, Friday the 13th! Came back to Nikolai’s building at 11am, after a full study and pumped and ready to go. Nobody answers. We call the phone number he gave us, wrong number. We call the neighbors to see if they know anything about it, and she offers three words, “I don’t know” and shuts the door in our faces. We take a little walk home, trying to contact, but nobody’s on the streets, save Vitali, a contact coming straight out of a stairwell.


At home, we plan our work in our mission responsibilities and in our area. Buckwheat and cheese sandwiches for lunch. Followed that up with another reading the Book of Mormon meeting with Artur. He prayed at the beginning, with his own words, but he’s got some of the Jehovah’s Witnesses doctrine mixing him up just a little bit. But all in all, a great prayer and his questions about the things reads are truly sincere. We sat on the wrong bus to get to him, so we didn’t have a ton of time… but enough to drink tea (good thing I’ve got my spare tea bags!) and to discuss and pray.


Into Moscow from there to check out Sokolniki’s game night. Checked it out, Elder Wirthlin’s brainchild once he arrived there. Put remaining money on cell phones for answering machines, and got in the metro at 15 till 9pm. Up the green line, a man sat across from me, who, apparent from his mannerisms, was drunk. I decided not to try and talk to him, because he was drunk, but that didn’t deter him from getting up and sitting down next to me. With the strongest alcohol breath I’ve ever tasted, he told me ‘tell me a story!’ I gave him a Joseph Smith pamphlet and told him to come Sunday to church, and we would talk more. After a few minutes of conversation, and 5 or 6 mouthfuls of beer breath, Sergei shook my hand and left at Voykovskaya. Oh, missionary service in Russia!


2/14/09
Valentine’s day! Last year was our big branch activity, making cards, playing bingo, and ‘Do you love your neighbor?’ Vasya was there, and Maksim, and Artur, and Ilya talked with Elder and Sister Vincent the whole time.


No such activities in our branch. We set up a split with Elder Kodirov and Angelo, so Elder Kodirov could meet with Vitali and Olyeca and company. We’re passing that family to Lobnya so they can coordinate with Kasim and Alyona in going to church.


Elder Angelo and I found out from Nikolai’s wife that he ‘moved’. So we took our tvorog cake to a less-active Mikhail, who lives two buildings down from us. We showed up uninvited, rang his intercom and he relented. We went up, a very bare apartment, just introduced ourselves. He set the tea pot, we turned off the TV while he was in the kitchen. We showed him pictures. He said he’d start coming back to church in two years, once he’s on pension. He works in a rocket production factory here in Khimki. But was surprised at how close we lived to him and is fine with us coming over more frequently. Not sure what that means, considering his last face-to-face contact with missionaries was a chance meeting on the street, 6 years ago.


He drinks black tea, I noticed a filled ashtray, and without a doubt there was alcohol somewhere in that apartment. Although he lives with his brother, who isn’t at all associated with the church.


When I asked if we could close with a prayer. He closed the door and asked “which one?” He’s forgotten how to pray and the only remnants of his 7-8 month association with the church (from meeting the missionaries, to getting baptized, to falling into inactivity) were a pass-a-long card with Greg Olsen’s rendering of the resurrected Christ and Mary magdalene outside the tomb, and the way old school hymn books / booklets, before the green edition came out in Russian.


After that, we tried to follow up on a contact. Walked to another part of Khimki, searching for building 6, which ended up on the opposite side of the street from buildings 4 and 2, and behind a building and a parking lot. Nobody was home, so we just contacted back to our part of Khimki, went to the little park just off Leningrad place, with the Khimki slides. Elder Angelo all about taking pictures, with four days of his mission left. We waited for the other elders and talked about life. About trying to describe missionary work in Russia, and about answering people’s questions. How was your mission? Did you love the people? How many baptisms did you have? He’s pretty cynical, and it’s understandable having gone the two years without a baptism,but he’s going back with his head up.


2/15/09
Genadi was sick this morning, so we went to church by ourselves.


Rule #1 if you’re a missionary, DO NOT PLAY CELL PHONE GAMES DURING SACRAMENT MEETING!


Brother Nechipirov, our resident mission president, came up to Elder Burgess after sacrament and asked if there were any investigators that he could help us out with! That’s the golden question from members to missionaries. We decided it was better to see if he could accompany us the next time, but Igor put his foot down when we called and said it was a no-go.


Sunday school with the facsimile and all that hoo-hah.


The deaf, homeless guy showed up again, apparently after a few month’s absence. He was supposedly in Ukraine.


Tracted the night out, Anton couldn’t meet at 8pm like we had hoped, so we decided to talk to one last person before coming home to phone calls. We crossed the street to the bus stop and talked to a Russian Orthodox guy for about 20 seconds before his mini-bus pulled up. We gave him our tri-fold and he promised to call as he jumped in. Satisfied by the Lord’s little miracle, we went home through the slush to call our investigators.


2/16/09
Email reveals that Arron Taylor has been accepted to Brigham Young University, and that we’ll officially be having him feed me with his dining plus once a week! Plus we’ll get to hang out.


3 month fitness pass costs 15000 roubles, so we opted out (we wanted to just play basketball one time). Made Elder Burgess my world famous pancakes.


President cranney called… not so often that your Mission President calls with an ‘idea’ (we call it revelation, mission presidents call it ideas) concerning one of your investigator families. With Igor and Otkaz last night, President Cranney suggested just one of us showing up with President Nechipirov as companion, and the other on a split with Sergei Sovyolov. We discussed it, prayed about it, and feel that it’s what we should do. The plot thickened though, when Ira, with whom I talked to on the phone tonight, said that she’s not all that interested in it. The Book of Mormon is hard to read. Also, Kira’s sick, so Wednesday’s meeting might not even go through!


2/17/09
A miracle, I’m writing about events on the day they actually happened! 


Our interviews with President today, and I shared with him some of my impressions from reading the Old Testament, especially Jeremiah and the fact that Jeremiah preached 40 years, under 3 kings, and the only people who heeded him up and left town! (Lehi and his family). I got a little bit of President’s view, how it kills him when he hears missionary murmuring and how people react when all he’s trying to do only his best to help us and the work, and to just hear those little comments, it’s disheartening.


Elder Burgess and I will have at least another 3 weeks after the next transfer (till the end of March that is) with some work to do! English club, new invitations, map of the mission, splits, etc. 


2/18/09
If I titled my journal entries, like my laughable companions Elder Parker and Burgess, today’s would probably be: “Let’s partake of the wafers”


A direct quote from our friend, Artur. Oh what reading the Book of Mormon in English does for your conversational fluency!


Another could be Grisha’s “All is possible”, in response to the First Vision. Azerbaijan / Armenian people are a lot more believing in that respect! In part, probably from the poor economic situations there and how people are humbled because of it.


Got my change holder contraption today, Sergei grilled sandwiches, a bunch of snow (almost all day).


Genadi either had the world’s biggest hangover today, a heart attack, or went away, because he stood us up and didn’t answer all day and his apartment lights were out. Probably hang over, last night’s phone conversation with… wow! He was quoting Shakespeare and what not.


Met with Sergei in Liga, the big mall, in Mu-mu’s and we got a table. Over the din of a 5 year old’s birthday, a party clown and her antics, we shared a first lesson. A really sharp kid, with problems in his family. He’s early 20s, has moved out of the house, and all he had to say about Moroni 10:3-5 was ‘strong verses, strong verses.’
 ‘I want… to stop by your service.’ so he’ll be at church Sunday! Gave us a fist pump good-by.


Grisha was in his little shoe shop. Humble circumstances might just bring him and his family of 4 daughters to Christ!


Atlantis, aliens, hell being a reincarnation on a planet without belief in God, no such thing as truth… people on the streets have weird ideas.


2/19/09
Elder Burgess’s family picture elicits a variety of reactions. From ‘sexy’ on Novokuznetskaya Way, with a strange English-Russian translator to ‘Americans ears stick out too’ in Aleksandr and Yekaterina’s apartment one floor above us this evening.


Weekly planning wasn’t anything special today, reading the Old Testament is plugging along. In Daniel at the moment, with the end near, and Isaiah to return to.


Elder Burgess is teaching me a grammar principle everyday, and I myself am reviewing the grammar in Modern Russian, starting from the basics (verb conjugations, and noun declinations).


Aleksandr is a trolley bus driver with his wife (Yekaterina) and a 3.5 year old son, Artyom. REally good, simple people. First time ‘officially’ praying at home. Usually only at church, if they go. It’s hard at the Russian Orthodox church, where everything is standing, a 3 hour service. Man, best decision I’ve made to bring the tea packets around with us, so we always have herbal tea on hand.


2/20/09
District meeting, Elder Barney printed off a talk from President Eyring about unity. Crazy Aleksandr guy with giant beard and who was ‘categorically against’ praying to start our meeting. Lazy words he called it.


2/21/09
All day calling people (mini-missionaries), planning, and cooking. My not-so-tasty brainchild casserole. We left the apartment.


Less-active Mikhail wouldn’t have anything with us today. “Not today, today I am relaxing, I’m sleeping!”


The healer lady gave us her home phone and said to come back during the week, not so much.


Sergei (eternal English clubber) was a no-go, talked to an old man who loves cowboy clothes and said he would buy any from us if we had them. A few more ‘God at the top of His mountain, multiple baths to get to him’ conversations. Time to memorize the verse where Christ it is only through him, and give it to people on the streets. We’re meeting Sergei tomorrow for church!


2/22/09
Convinced Artur of the necessity of everyday repentance over the phone tonight, as opposed to the ‘repented, baptized, live right, die’ idea he had going on.


In the morning, we met Sergei on Novokuznetskaya and brought him to church. The members were really good in introducing themselves and talking to him. 3 or 4 investigators came to church too. You could see how pleased the members were with seeing new faces, and especially surprised when they found out that not a single one was from English club!


We were all presented with chocolate candy bars by the sisters to celebrate the 23rd of February, which is basically ‘Men’s day’ in Russia.


2/23/09
Dad got me registered for classes, Aaron avenged our family against Coach A by dispatching the Patriots in Districts, before falling to the losers bracket in the semi-finals in an OT loss to Valley view.


Spent pretty much all day at MEGA (IKEA, Stockmans, Ashan, Obi) shopping. It’s the closest to an American mall that Moscow has. Stockmans is basically Mervyn’s with a little grocery part too. Ashan is Costco / Walmart, Obi is Home Depot, and IKEA is IKEA (with 15 rouble hot dogs!)


In the evening, we went to FHE at Novokuznetskaya to be with Zhenya (who Elder Adamo is passing on to us). Good lesson about finding, developing, and gaining talents. A little reminder that I’ve not read my patriarchal blessing for quite some time now, not good.


Zhenya really loved it and is getting to know more and more people and liking everything about the church more and more!


2/24/09
Split-land, on Kantimirovskaya with Elder Jonovich. Office work earlier today, talked about transfers and a few problems in the mission.


Mom’s package got through with Sarah Christensen, without whitestrips for Elder Gavrilov and Kodirov, the one thing I asked for… but with applesauce bread, Grandma Taylor’s cookies, and Valentines from Amanda’s mia-maid class about how much they miss me. They ya go, leaders starting them young on the RMs!


Went with Elder Jonovich to a grandma’s place, Tatyana, who was converted when she prayed, belonging to another church, and heard a voice or had a thought or something that said ‘you’re further connection with me, will be only through the church of the Mormons’ She had to call a friend to even find out who the Mormons are. Way crazy zealous old lady. Sounds like she contacts in her neighborhood and town squares when the weather is good, and she meets with the other older ladies in the branch on Wednesdays to study Preach My Gospel!


Forgot about the blessing I gave to Elder Burgess, before we left for the office today. Kind of special, “last 3 months of the mission” blessing.


Meeting to pass Sergei to Elders Gavrilov and Demchenko tonight. In 4, a 1st lesson review. Elder Gavrilov is a really good teacher, spirit was strong, I shared Jacob 3:13 and my testimony, but Sergei just wouldn’t commit to praying about the Book of Mormon. He’ll continue reading and he remembers it very well, King Benjamin, the Sons of Mosiah, Zarahemla, etc. but he’s not quite ready to ask for that spiritual witness yet.


Did a little contacting with Elder Jonovich, who’s got basically no fears or reservations about talking to people on the streets. They’ve got a roomy apartment (two rooms) and not a bad little area.


2/25/09
Woke up to Elder Hochstetler’s ipod, I want an Ipod just for the alarm now.


Made Elder Jonovich run down an older man getting on his trolley bus to hand him a tri-fold. We talked to Igor Anatolaevich, a drunk man, 50, who was cussing himself senseless. We gave him a Book of Mormon, when he found out that we were Americans, he demanded to see our passports, as they’re written in German. Yeah… so we just told him to read the Book of Mormon and call the number on the tri-fold.


Went to the office, ended the split and finished the statistics work. Met with President about ZLC. Came home, spaghetti, planning English club for tomorrow (ZLC discussion / hopefully conclusion too) and a little of our training. PResident wants us to memorize the Family Proclamation as a mission!


2/26/09
ZLC, English club kind of kept me from getting all that spiritually into it. Watched a new church movie (done by Russian director, Russian actors, etc. It’s called ‘Together’... and it’s way cheesy.


Weekly announced that we’ll be memorizing the Family Proclamation as a mission, and I’m learning that you need to be prepared for these conferences and such, or it shows.


Showed the Reeses the 199 bus / mini-bus from Skhodenskaya to Rechnoy Vokzal, a 15-20 minute ride, and spent some office time in writing up a ‘mini-missionary’ call letter, and writing up our English club conclusion. We’ve either got or lost all the old SIM cards, and although all the answering machines just keep wigging out, we’ve decided to just bury this project and call it good. We had most of them working for the better part of 3 weeks, should be good enough! We’ll be spending some serious time in the office in connection with English club, mini-missionaries, and office map over the next few weeks, so my entries might get boring.


Met Sergei in Liga tonight, we thought he bailed on us, not answering his phone and what not, but he snuck up on us while we waited outside. We met in a little spot off the side of Mu-Mu’s there on the 2nd floor. Reviewined first lesson principles, he’s reading and we talked openly about baptism, prophets, the need for a restoration and the importance of gaining a personal testimony of it all through prayer. Way cool kid, shared his pine nuts with us as we walked out to the bus stop. HE was pretty impressed when I told him about the size of the conference center, and organ there. Artur and Gennadi are no-gos for tomorrow’s culture day at the museum. A meeting with Zhenya (our golden contact from Samara, to Elder Adamo, to us).


2/27/09
Not as cultural as expected, because of schedule conflicts, we went to district meeting in the office, learned about Ammon, the opportunist, and barely had time for grilled cheese and tomato soup before doing a split for Elder Adamo and Burgess meeting with Zhenya (with Vanik, our Armenian karate specialist 1st counselor in the branch presidency).


Elder Gallo and I had a good 30 minutes or so to contact around Novokuznetskaya. With every person it’s a different experience, so true. Gave a Book of Mormon to a kid named Lucas, 16 year old from Greece (but better in Russian), who remembered me from sports night apparently!


A few other of your categorical reactions (your a cult, general amusement, hesitant acceptance, apathy, etc.)


The meeting went well, he’s talking about the “change of heart” that’s happening to him. Back to the office, late night, and back to our beloved Khimki.


2/28/09
Not gonna miss our February culture night… so we took Saturday afternoon, our last day of the month, and went to the Museum of Russian Modern History on Tverskaya. Two hours walking the 30 or so rooms, a little boring, but it’s a museum. What can you expect? I’m cultured for that, that was all after our ‘March Madness’ planning session. First off, got a brilliant idea about structuring our Family Proclamation memorization on the NCAA bracket. So we had Saturday to do that (spilled over to Monday morning, but all is well in Zion). Secondly, we had our own planning about mission stuff and the ideas came pretty easily as far as Zone conference is concerned.


WE had the night open for the Milner family, but Elder Burgess made himself a friend, Aleksandr, on the bus in the morning and he invited us over to give him a Book fo Mormon at 8pm. So after the museum, after doing office stuff and getting ready for the mini-missionary (Sister Zhenya Potapova), we were off to Aleksandr’s house in Maritsa Rubtsovy (right by MEGA).


He let us in, showed us his hall / corridor / entry way, lined with bookshelves and filled with books. We sat in his kitchen, wife and daughter not home, and started talking. He offered tea, but we had to refuse because of our fasting. He said that his daughter didn’t have the best things to say about us… and that he’s not sure why he invited us over. The first time in his life that he’s invited strangers over. But he said there was just something about the whole thing that we didn’t mean any harm and we don’t either. No sooner than we started talking, 20-30 seconds, and down the hall I heard the lock turn and in come two women. Obviously the wife and daughter. The wife’s not happy and after exchanging a few words with her husband, says “And who are you? Well, I don’t invite you for tea, you give your little book, you leave my home, and I will make dinner.”


We gave Aleksandr the Book of Mormon and promptly left. Oh Russian women.


3/1/09
Maslenitza. Russian holiday, first day of spring, by tradition, if Russian spring is spring like this… I’ll wait for summer. We’re at -2 degrees C, with snow about 2 times a day.


Sergey was a no go for church, too bad :( Elder Burgess and I took a little walk before church around the Novokuznetskaya building. 95 people at church, that’s a lot! We had a new branch president called, Vanik Artunyan. A great guy, Armenian martial arts teacher.


Translated for Sister Gibbons, had, as always, some borderline testimonies, but one older sister crossed the line this time. Announced Kiev’s opening and dedication in April, and over the course of the ‘testimony’, said she received revelation earlier this week about Vanik being the next branch president. President Gibbons, with President Mikulin’s help, made a few necessary comments at the end to clear things up a bit.


Planned out March Madness in our madness to be much more disciplined. It comes from an answer to fasting and trying to become the missionary I want my little brother to become / be trained by. We made the mass text about it, and it’s got the mission in a buzz. We’re excited!


Elder Kodirov called with crazy news. The Zheltovy came to church again and Ilya’s got a baptismal date! But Valentina has completely stopped coming to church, and the Sulitovy are not good. They went to perform the sacrament, and then none of the family partook of it, considering they weren’t worthy. I think they had just been fighting before the missionaries arrived. Need to pray for them! Elder Price called too, the little baby, he misses me.


3/2/09
March Madness printed off and in action. The mini-missionary's been oriented and blessed, families written, groceries bought (1600 roubles for groceries today, 35 roubles to the dollar, 200 roubles for Mach 3 razor blades), and now we just sit.


Found out that Kimball Smithee got his mission call! He goes into the MTC April 29 and then on to the Illinois Peoria mission, same as Taylor Thomas (Seth’s BF growing up). We’ll overlap by a month, but I’m for sure going to write him. I’ve seen too many missionaries get down without the kind of support system or network like I’ve got.


The Old Testament was finished last night, with one exception, Isaiah! The March Madness includes studying that bad boy, 80 pages, 30 days, eternal life.


Planned and made calls for the rest of our week… so much planning as a stinking AP (at least that’s how it is with Elder Burgess and me).


3/3/09
Forgot that yesterday we said goodbye to the likes of 3 sisters and 2 elders. Two areas closed, and one more at the end of the month, with two more to close come April, and then four more when I go home.


Really good study today with the whole “March Madness” feel. Everything disciplined and in line. Isaiah will be read by the end of the month!


Went to the office today, stats done (except for sending to branch presidents). English club get to know you sheet drafts, and the mini-missionaries in electronic format, and the English club statistics sheet and pre-baptism instructions filled out. A new, another ZLC on Thursday. I’m all counselled, meeting, and conferenced out… oh wait, two zone conferences next week!


Elder Burgess and I have decided to gird our loins and go full Russian speaking. We’re crazy, gonna try and show everybody an example.


Meeting with Sergey about prayer, need somewhere besides Liga to meet. Brought cheesecake.


The Milner family is a rather lively, jovial bunch, and it’s too bad that Semyon is the only one who comes to church. Even then, he only comes once a month or so.


Stopped by Sasha and Katya, one floor above us. It was Katya’s birthday! They bought ‘our’ tea since last time (chamomile meadow), so we drank tea, ate some birthday cake, and gave them a Book of Mormon for a birthday present, along with a little boxed cake we bought ourselves. Katya’s starting to feel something, we just need to steer Sasha away from telescopes, guns, and war games too!


3/4/09
President Nechiporov (soon-to-be Rostov mission president) gave the quote of the day, about Igor and Olga, in English, “Basically, they chickened out”, right in the middle of a Russian conversation with Elder Burgess on the phone.


A close second goes to our bus driver. We’re coming around a corner on Leningrad lane, he sees two cars that have bumped into each other with drivers out, so tries to swing out around them. He stops when it’s clear we’re not wide enough of them. After sitting for 20 seconds, he says ‘we’re stuck’ in the most deadpan voice, and then opens the doors for everyone to get off.


Good advice from the Gregories, caught President Filimonov, no go with Grisha, but we met Kostya and Sasha (spaceship engineer / scientist).


3/5/09
Another mini-ZLC in the mission office. The low-down was set for English Club, presented the whole plan and how to start it up, and the Zone conferences turned over to the Zone Leaders to plan. They each had a 3 minute brainstorming session and it was already clearly understandable that Elder Burgess and I have been struggling for revelation that does not come with our stewardships as assistants. Compare our struggles with how quickly the inspiration came to the Zone Leaders who have that stewardship


Problem with office computer abuse by missionaries, incident with Britney Spears.


We got out to Artur and planned our lesson on the bus. We taught about baptism, using the account of Christ’s baptism as a start and relying on scriptures. He asked a good question, “how do I know who should baptize me? There are many who baptize these days, should I be baptized a few times?”


We answered with Hebrews 5:4, the authority, the priesthood. We read Acts 8 about Phillip baptizing and Peter & John giving the Holy Ghost. That one got him, the spirit was making him ponder. We asked him to pray about Joseph Smith, to know if that priesthood was restored. He said in time, he’s not quite ready to act if he were to get the ‘yes’.


From there, we planned Gennadi’s lesson on the way… plan of salvation over a game of chess. At the end of Elder Burgess’s defeat, using the black and white queens as spirit and body with resurrection. Elder Burgess made an analogy of looking back on his soccer career and our judgment, looking back at our lives.


In the evening, we met with Michael. Came to find out that he’s a mere 10 minute walk from us, living on his job site where he is furnishing an apartment. We went up, sat around a plywood table with bucket and styrofoam seats in makeshift chairs, part of a partially completed children’s room. He’s been keeping a study journal as he reads the Book of Mormon. Has a lot of questions, good ones too. We agreed to teach him the four missionary lessons before tackling his scripture study questions. He liked the mirror and apostasy analogy, trying to gather all the pieces of a shattered mirror together, vs getting a whole new mirror… and that there is truth in every piece. Really great prayer to end the lesson. He prayed about finding truth and learning more.


3/6/09
Early morning, 5 am to meet Elder Bazhenov, an Elder returning home to Novosibirsk through Moscow, at the airport and bring him to the office for President Cranney to release him. 


District meeting about complacency. Tried to find Andrey’s place at Skhodenskaya metro stop, wrong way, wrong map, approaching branch activity, Elder Taylor freaking out and being in a terrible mood.


Found the house! We don’t know the apartment #, so we call, not available, no entrance. Elder Taylor blows a gasket, but only on the inside.


Back in time for the late-starting dual-branch women’s day party. Sergey showed up about 40 minutes into the event. We had to go out and meet him, got a little lost after coming out of the metro. Sergey after, on the escalator down Novokuznetskaya asks, “Are there any other missionaries for Khimki?” 


“Nope” I answered, “Just us, the two”.


“Now three” he replied :)


3/7/09
So here’s the deal… planning, lasagna (used way too much tomato paste / sauce), Michael, our favorite ‘I’m sleeping’ inactive wasn’t home, neither were Sasha and Katya (our upstairs neighbors), so we got a little contacting in and some tracting before meeting our branch president, Vanik Artunyan, with his wife and his unknown son, Artyom, a 17 year old I’ve never met before. 


We brought them to Grisha’s house, 9th May street, building 2, apartment 118. We went in and had a full house, table drought out and Vanik at one head, with Evanez, Marina, Lyudmila (wife) to his left.


Grisha was at the opposite end of the table, with Farazem, Lyudmila (wife of President Artunyan), Artyom, me, and Elder Burgess at his left. So we had 10 ppl in total, 2 missionaries, 2-3 members and 5-6 who weren’t. I had about 39 seconds of teaching, with Elder Burgess leading the lesson and President Artunyan keeping them in there, teaching about Joseph Smith and Apostasy. Lyudmila, his wife, had really good additions and inviting them to church and talking about what happens at church. Way excited about Relief Society and Young Women’s, and they bring their own tea with them everywhere too, just like we do!


I found out that Vanik, our president, is the President of the Russian Karate Federation, yeah, way cool.


Great lesson, they brought out cake and fruit and tea. They’re all looking forward to continuing to meet, both families. AFterwards they gave us a ride home and we made it back just in time by 9:30pm. Lyudmila was straight from the pool, Vanik’s words were “branch president is a temporary calling, I’m called, I will be released, but I’ll never be released from being a missionary”


3/8/09
Women’s day!


We met Gennadi on the bus stop and all went in to church together. He drew me a diagram of Lake Baikal and the city he was born in.


He only made it through the first hour. Vladimir made the first two hours, as usual. Vova, the Ukrainian who is deaf, mute, and homeless without documentation was there again. Elder Burgess sat by him while I held down the fort with Gennadi and Vladimir.


Leftover lasagna for lunch and an evening with Michael (Moldovan) at the Nechipirovs. They’ve got a way nice apartment, cooked us dinner (came after the lesson). We had 8 at this lesson, 2 of us, Michael, Mom, Dad, and their daughter, then Vladimir, Elyena, Liza and Elena’s Russian Orthodox sister, who talks in exactly the same way as Vladimir, tones, pauses, etc. 


Michael got bombarded, they got way excited, but I think it was good for him just to get some interaction with members besides the missionaries. The Nechipirovs are learning and it’ll take some practice and experience, but they’ll be alright.


3/9/09
22 month mark, wow, a wild ride of blessings and trials that’s too quickly coming to an end! Less than two transfers now. In the evening, we went out to Ashan City to meet and talk with Fara. A 21 year old Uzbek from Tashkent, a barman and restaurant manager. Doesn’t practice Islam because of his job with alcohol, but his whole family at home is practicing. We didn’t have much time before we needed to leave to get to the Cranney’s to spend the night for Zone Conference. Fara was a little disappointed. He wanted to feed us his version of Plov, an Azerbaijan type, just because we knew the word “pakhambar”, welcome to mid asian culture, so welcoming!


Parted as new friends, thought we found a marshutka from Planernaya to Mitino, which would mean no need for the metro to reach the Cranneys! Ended up at the corner of Mitino, the Ark, and the Rook. Aleksandr (Cranney’s driver) came for us and we made it just in time for the game and treat at family night. 


3/10/09
5:30am to honey nut cheerios and me navigating President Cranney to the Kashirskaya building for the first of this week’s 3 zone conferences. The south zone, with Elders Randall, Jensen, Hansen, Terry, Price, Smith, Prete (came late from his 3.5 weeks of being stuck in Almaty), Perez, Adamo by way of split with Perez), Knuth, Chemezov, Jonovich, and Hochstetler, and Sisters Ryabokon & Brown. All about unity, especially with church leaders.


Finished our day off with a fig from Gennadi and a meeting with Michael. We’re being very concise, clear, and trying to convince him of the need to pray more often. He said that he prays maybe once a month! No wonder he is so lost in discerning of spiritual things and in understanding the scriptures properly. But he’s from Moldova, has to go back for 2 weeks at the end of this week, but will be back to continue working and meeting with us.


3/11/09
Another 5:30am to get from Khimki to Sezhalniki in time for the East Zone conference. Elders Berrett and Nielson conducted this one, with Elders King, Dogadailo, Warren, Artunyan, Demchenko, Kozirov, Gavrilov, Berlin, Foote, and Kulikovsky, and Sisters Gorina and Samsonovich. About unity again, unity in Christ, with member, and with missionaries.


Elder Burgess and I couldn’t quite come to a unity in our training, so I said I didn’t feel it and he decided to give in today, let me be companion A and he’d support as B. Then the next day’s would be vice versa. We agreed, and I talked about the name of Christ, and what it means in our church and to us as representatives. Zone conference in whole dedicated to unity, especially with church leaders and Christ.


Some time in the office with statistics and a little bit of working on the English club invitations. Then off to culture night. Beauty and the Beast musical in Russian. Bought a CD too, hopefully it’s good quality. The show ran until 10pm, so we spent the night on Universitet, with Elder Knuth and Chemezov, on their dirty floor, decent bed.


3/12/09
Another 5:30am morning, yeah! Up and showered, and out the door before their alarm went off (Elder Knuth and Chemezov’s). A double McMuffin and OJ for both Elder Burgess and I at McD’s on Tretekovskaya, came to the Central building, and planned our training upstairs. Came down and had our last Zone Conference, about pride and humility. Our training was about ‘contention’ and we talked about yielding to others and about the love of God being the cure for contention, and had people share verses about the love of God that have helped them.


Sister Cranney’s talk about her family makes me wonder what Mom would say about me… and about all of the kids in our family. Some serious translating between senior couples, and Sisters Nartova and Potanova (mini-missionary).


3rd day of beef stroganoff on rice, and it’s still good! Clean up and off to the office for more work on English club… on the invitations for me, tracing the map for universitet building, and running the program for Elder Burgess. Came home in a bunch of traffic. I was reading my scriptures, a serious lack of study the past 3-4 days has been killer spiritually, with one hand holding the quad and the other the overhead bar. I let go of the bar to turn the page, and the bus driver hit the brakes exactly then. I reached for the bar, and ended up hitting the girl next to me in the face instead! I apologized profusely, and just got a cold ‘dignified’ shoulder… I was pretty embarrassed.


3/13/09
Friday the 13th! Weekly planning… thinking about moving out of Khimki in the near future, as there is no member support for this area. Tuesday morning we’ve got a big ol’ meeting with President Cranney to talk about where we’ll need to be at the end of May (with x number of missionaries and y number of areas, covering which branches and what/if we can do with English Club then, and how to get there.


Stopped by Michael, our less active member in a neighboring building. Honestly, it was the most unpleasant meeting I’ve ever had. It truly is hard for me to look at people how I think that God looks at them. Michael’s got no signs of being a baptized member, the apartment is filthy, he’s unkept, but that wasn’t all that bad. The worst is his speech. How he swears, takes the Lord’s name in vain, insults and disgraces women. We tried to talk about religion after a game of backgammon, but all he’s got are his ‘tricky’ questions. We prayed, he prayed at the end, and said he’d come to church if we all went together on Sunday… which was our two rays of hope. I just felt dirty and repulsed after our meeting. I need to pray to look at and treat him like a wayward son, and not someone to be disgusted by or to judge.


3/14/09
Yesterday I made the promise to myself not to touch my face (keep the little flare ups from coming from my oily hands and from agitating and plucking and pulling, etc.) and I’m accounting for it in prayer!


At the end of the first day and I’ve only touched my face twice! It’ll be hard having whiteheads and not being able to pop them.


A lot of time in the office today, working on the English invitations and transfers and calling branch presidents about mini-missionaries.


Came back into Khimki, met Kostya on the street, we strolled and talked about a range of things, from the Jehovah’s witnesses who called and talked to him on the phone for an hour the other day, to why homosexuals say they are that way, to repentance, to having trials and circumstances change as God’s plan to make us grow. Those kind of things always get me to thinking. He called us as we were getting on the bus to come back home, because he forgot to say “Thank you!”


3/15/09
3 people to accompany to church, Mikhail, our less active member declined when we rang his home speaker, despite promising to come earlier in the week. We met Artur under the clock at Station Khimki, to hop on the elektrichka coming from Skhodnya to Moscow. In the 2nd wagon with Sergey, but friend, Sergey wasn’t there and didn’t answer his phone.


So we ended up at church with 1 (⅓ not bad) and he was only till the end of the 2nd hour. Seeing more warm relationships between the members and missionaries. 6 men in priesthood signed up on the sheet Boris passes around every week.


Finished out the day with leftover soup and phoning / setting up meetings for the coming week. One lesson we called Sister Nechipirov about two inactive sisters in Khimki, just to know more about them, and she ended the conversation with a promise to call her counselors and activate the visiting teachers. WORK THROUGH THE MEMBERS AND THE KEYS. #1 advice to any new or soon-to-be missionaries.


3/16/09
7am at Metro, the store, helped Sister Cranney shop for the 16 families with cancer kids that we help through a hospital. Got ourselves some peanut butter, jelly, salsa, and tortilla chips and a dragon fruit. It’s a pretty intense looking thing from Vietnam, and a pretty penny, that’s for sure!


Helped sort at the Cranney’s, wrote home. Aaron’s got a stop sign ticket to contest in court, Amanda’s gonna get her patriarchal blessing, Kelsey Peterson’s married, Kim Watson’s getting divorced, Brent Allen’s back home and going to BSU, Abe gets back May 1 and Kyle’s already back. Nic Hopkins and Megan Stockinger are married and Richard’s hanging out at BYU-I.


Fajitas with Cranney’s cleaning lady, Sveta (from the Rechnoy branch) and Aleksandr (their driver). On the trolley bus from Planernaya, got a prompting to stop by Gennadi… hesitated, but gathered myself by the next step, and we went unannounced. He was pretty taken aback! Invited us in, played chess, and just kind of hung out to support and strengthen him. He quit drinking the Wednesday before that. We talked about baptism. He believes that his Russian Orthodox baptism was for real because of the events that followed it (back in 1993). After about an hour and a half, we were out  and yeah… went shopping in our ghetto Pyatorichka. Can’t remember the evening events… that’s what I get for only writing when I’ve got time.


3/17/09
Big old meeting with President Cranney from 8:30am until 12:30pm. Figured out the plans for moving apartments in the very near future, along with closing Khimki at the end of March (2 weeks), moving the APs to Sokolniki to work there, moving the International branch Elders and other stuff. Once we got that more or less figured out, we talked about transfers for end of MArch and then again in mid-April. President Cranney took us to lunch in the cafeteria. Down on the first floor of “Meridian Tower”. Pretty good, returned to stats and a little ‘finalization’ that will still be changed, probably a dozen times! 


When we got lunch, rather than say a blessing for the food, President Cranney remarked something along the lines of, “I typically say one blessing for my food for the day in the morning. Heavenly Father and I are talking a lot during the day about more important things.”


Went and met Maxwell at Novokuznetskaya metro. Elder Burgess met him for the first time, and he gave me a sweet purple and black tie-dye Ghana shirt and showed us some pictures of him and some crocodiles and the hotel he worked at in Ghana and his mom.


Came back to the office and almost have the new English club invitations done. Hopped on the bus and we’re on our way to Igor and Olga’s place again. WE planned on doing a family home evening with a reader’s theater of Alma, Amulek, and Zeezrom’s encounter in Alma 11-13. We highlighted the whole thing and parts and everything. But as we walked from Prospekt Druzhba bus stop to their house, got some feelings that it would be different. We got there, they were happy to see us, had dinner (salad, fish, mashed potatoes), followed by blini. Started talking about ancestry and found out that Igor is German (grandpa or something) and Olga has Polish blood. Elder Burgess showed his pedigree chart, I shared Grandpa and Grandma VanDerwerken’s story of courtship and how Grandpa joined the church. By then, we had to go, but we got pictures with them. Kira danced us out the door and we were home by 9pm!


3/18/09
Early into the office to finish the English club invitations for Novokuznetskaya and for Universitet. Got those done, tried to pass our ‘get to know you’ sheet by church legal on the 14th floor of Meridian, and it was completely shot down. No written anything, especially for gathering information about people.


Went on down to Kashirskaya to go on a split with Elder Jenson and Randall. Elder Jenson came to Khimki with me. WE stopped by Gennadi. Elder Jenson’s pretty decent at chess, still lost though. Then we read from Acts 8 about Phillip and Simon, Peter and John, and the gift of the HOly Ghost. He says they layed hands on his head and he believes he received the gift of the HOly Ghost from the Orthodox church. Oh, how hard to teach! Came home, dinner of rice, ground beef, and beans, then out for a good refreshing 1-2 hours of street contacting. It’s been a little while since I’ve done that. Then to bed with a blank day ahread.


3/19/09
Woke up, from out of nowhere, with diahrea. Couldn’t keep anything in me, except an apple. Studied, during companionship study, had to lie down and that still didn’t help. Elder Jensen told me about Elder Terry’s having a rough time, he can’t let go of his ex-girl friend of 3 years. She Dear John-ed him (wrote a letter breaking up with him) about a year ago and he still hasn’t gotten over it. That’s right kiddos, no going on your mission with a girlfriend, only with potentials (where withdrawal and depression don’t result from hearing about engagements).


Took a seat on the 443 and at the final turn, the apple, not being able to find his way out the way food normally does, came up the less natural way with a cough and help. I held it in till we got off and let it out in a nearby trash can. Decided to just wait in the office for them to come to us. Got some medicine, Sprite, and learned how to say bloating, constipation, intestinal blockage, and all sorts of other fun side effects in Russian. Finished memorizing “Family Proclamation to the World” in Russian. Came home to a good 1.5 hour nap, some banana and crackers (at Sister Cranney’s suggestion) and watched “The Testaments” to give my mind a break from everything. To be sick = not fun!


3/20/09
Woke up feeling a lot better. Banana breakfast, almost done with Isaiah. REad 53:2-5, really good about Christ. Partook of dragon fruit for the first time. It looks and tastes like a white kiwi with the seeds just mixed throughout. The taste is just of a less sweeter, and more ‘classic’ flavor.


District meeting, sharing stuff from personal study and singing ‘Battle Hymn of the Republic’ to end it.


On a split with Elder NElson in my old Pervomayskaya (Sokolniki branch) area. A meeting with Joe, a Tunisian French speaking investigator who is husband of one of the Sister’s investigators. Hard, his limited English, our nonexistent French. But The Book of Mormon in French and the spirit is what it’s all about! Even with his Russian wife having her late husband’s parents bringing false charges about child neglect in order to get her apartment from her. Nasty situation :(


3/21/09
Ended the split helping Elder NElson clean up their apartment and figuring out what stuff belongs to missionaries and what does not. They’ve moving out of that apartment soon. President did have him in the plans for AP with me, but I wasn’t getting that vibe. Maybe with some more experience, but he just doesn’t quite seem ripe for that.


President called, he needs a new missionary map asap to submit branch boundary suggestions in a week and a half… so we bought a big, meter by meter map of Moscow, with good details and an atlas of Moscow metro areas to scan and tweak for adding to it. Spent the rest of the day in the office with that assignment.


We called our landlady, things are already in motion for Khimki’s closure!


3/22/09
Sergey picked up his phone! Last night we got in touch with him after a full week of his voicemail. Couldnt’ make church, but tomorrow is planning on a lesson at 6pm on Novokuznetskaya and staying after for the institute / YSA FHE.


2nd to last Sunday in Rechnoy this week and no one’s the wiser. Khimki hasn’t exactly been the spot for working with members and accordingly, is next on the area on the chopping block!


Really strange feelings going back to Pervomayskaya for the split. Pretty sure it’s like I told Elder Burgess, “returning to a place I never have been” … or that I just have closure already and no unfinished business or pressing desire to ‘have another go’ in that area. Now that I’ve thought about it a little, I’m not so sure how I’ll handle returning to a branch I’ve already served in, or how I would handle it in other areas (KZ, International, Dolgoprydny, Lobnya, Ramenskoe). Maybe I did a little self-examination and figure that in each of my past areas I did as much as I could to do what the Lord wanted of me for those people and that area… and here is where I need to add ‘at that time.’ Honestly it would be hard to return to any of those places. It won’t be the same apartment in Sokolniki, thankfully, but the branch and area will basically be the same. I’m definitely more intent on working and coordinating with members and I think I understand a little better how to go about doing that as well. But we’ll have to see!


Right now I’m standing in front of a choice, having read the missionary library, Preach My Gospel, and entire standard works (as of yesterday), what to study for the last 2 months of my mission?? We’ll see..


Elder Earl gave a good 10-12 minute talk today about magnifying your calling. It was quite something to behold in comparison to his language abilities in Sokolniki when I first served around him and from 6 months ago in Dolgoprudny when we served together!


Weekly planning with Elder Burgess for the last time, as Khimki closes in the middle of the following week. Feeling a little bit of the ‘coming to a close’ at present. The clock on my whole mission experience is ticking away as well. A little over 2 months to fill and serve and the rest of my life and eternity to remember how I finished my mission!


3/23/09
Paige is potty training, patriarchal blessings have been received, Seth had his first miss since making his New Year’s resolution to write. Sounds like they’ll be a bit of a crew of relatives / family around the time of my arrival. Aaron’s graduation and a tentative Eagle court of honor. Who knows, maybe he’ll even make his Duty to God in time! Running out on the little turd, only 17 for 3 more weeks.


Making brownies, got a phone call and a mini-missionary is ready for service next transfer, from 17 April to 28 May. Slava from the Kakhovsky branch. It’s been quite a ride with these mini-missionaries. Searching for a while to get Sister Nartova through to the end of May. PResident Shichin came through in the clutch, convincing one sister, Zhenya Potapova, to serve.. She only for 3 weeks, till yesterday actually, and then yesterday President Shichin asked another sister, and she’s now serving until Friday, when Sveta Voronina from Sokolniki will start. She’s till May 2, and then Anna Pavlenko from Zhelznodorozhny takes over till the end. Crazy crazy stuff, and it works out when you go through the keys of the priesthood.


3/24/09
Interviews with President Cranney today. I asked him about his family, especially with what’s been on my mind as far as examples (of my brothers and personal example for Aaron and Amanda). Really seeing how President Cranney cares about the future of every missionary, and who they’ll become going home. Quite a few things that are going on right now that are disconcerting, but with mid-transfers in a week, things should get a shaking up. We met with Presdient and helped himd ecide on what those mid-transfers will be.


Finished off the day with a little split, Elder Earl going with Elder Burgess to meet Gennadi, and Grisha and President Arutyunyan. Elder Barney and I taught Igor a lesson in the mission office. He’s money, Igor that is. We watched the Restoration movie and talked about the testimony of the Book of Mormon and how that testimony leads to a testimony of Joseph Smith as a prophet, a testimony of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saitns as the one true, living church, and a testimony of Christ as our savior and redeemer. I shared Ehter 12:27 with him, and he said that it’s his favorite verse once he recognized it (after a few seconds), and that he reads it every day and has read it to his mom and friend back in Volgograd! He’s just progressing along, quitting smoking, coming to church, and changing his life.


The other Elder’s lessons went well, and Elder Earl had some good participation, as said Elder Burgess. Good to hear!


3/25/09
Do something awesome day (anniversary of first kiss, Stephanie’s made up holiday). Banana pancakes for breakfast. English club run through, but during study got a phone call from Elder Price about Yuri. He called Elder Price and he’s having a rough time back in Belarus. He landed well, as far as work goes, but his family is against his being a member of our church. He hasn’t been to church for months, but still reads and prays and follows the Word of Wisdom. It’s just been difficult without any family support. He hasn’t answered my last email, but PResident gave me permission to call him and I got his # from Elder Price and will be calling in the next few days.


The whole day pretty much turned into getting English Club ready. Everything went fairly well, we got a count of about 125 people there, more than our first expected 6 groups of 10! We were pretty pleased by the fact that things went off that well… but always room for improvement! 


The new one on Universitet had 0 show up, so we’ll have to get some more of those invitations printed up to get things started.


We called Sergey earlier that day about meeting, but he didn’t give us anything specific, but came to English club!


3/26/09
District meeting about conversion and Elder Bednar’s parable of the pickle talk. My spiritual thought about the difference between a testimony of the Book of Mormon and a deep abiding faith in it’s power during the conversion process.


A split with Elder London including a whole lot of contacting, Lee-pong cancelling our only planned meeting, forcing us to call the member family that was going to house the meeting.


WE gave away a Book of Mormon to a man named Rodion, but said to just call him Radik. He spoke pretty good English. We asked if we could talk to him and he replied, “As long as wer’e going this way”, point the way we had jut come from… so we naturally turned around and walked with him :) He also wants a copy in English, so the Elders London and Barney will be able to get him that!


Interesting split. Elder London is a pretty stout contactor, and I can see how that gets really old, fast without working too much with members!


3/27/09
As we walked into the office, our meeting place to end the split, Elder Earl was on the phone. He called my name and said that some guy was calling about English Club who had played basketball with you and Elder Price last year.


“No way!”


I got on the line, “Zdorovo”


It was Igor! So basically, Elder Price and I were playing ball and learning swear words and trying to find through our talents, and reach a different crowd, and our efforts didn’t just come to naught! He said that he’ll come next Wednesday. Called Elder Price and he was pretty stoked about it too.


Tomorrow we got some crazy plans. Passing out all the movies we’ve got in the apartment in our contacting, 7 Lamb of God, 7 Together Forever, and 4 Finding Faith in Christ. We’ll see how it goes!


3/28/09
In the middle of our repentance lesson with Gennadi, we got a phone call from PResident Cranney. Elder Burgess took it, walked into the hall as Gennadi brought up last year’s Georgian war, Medved’s response, and “turn the other cheek.” Unfortunately, Gennadi just doesn’t seem to be grasping things. He asked us today, after last lesson being about the apostasy, again, why are there so many different denominations if they all teach about Christ and about doing good.  Came out with the news, Sister Gorina is getting released, a medical release with her seizures, and going home Monday. President Cranney is breaking the news to her tomorrow, in person at church (in Sokolniki), and he needs us to find another mini-missionary till the transfer.


It just forces you to be so grateful for the health and strength the Lord has blessed me with. An athletic body that, in the first place, is healthy and that can take the strains of missionary life.


Another douse of forec-fed gratefulness when we stopped by Margarita’s today, a deaf former investigator who got a hold of some anti stuff and started going not so good on the church. She was happy to see us, and wrote that she’d come to church tomorrow! A reminder of my ASL days at BYU, and how glad I am to have my ears that I might hear the wonderful sound of things.


Back to yesterday’s proposal in contacting… a way fun twist on this afternoon’s finding as we went out with movies. We passed out all the Together Forever DVDs, along with copies of the Family Proclamation, all to families walking around! Felt like the best two years when they pass out the Book of Mormons on the town square. Second try at lasagna, we’re improving… we’ll try it with the white sauce this next time.


3/29/09
Two months left today, officially. I wish for my brother that he doesn’t have dreams about members in his area messing up meetings, like mine with Sergey Sovelyov last night. In the dream, he was bringing up all the anti points with the fall and polygamy and blacks and the priesthood. I guess that’s what happens when you turn down helping the missionaries 3 or 4 times (we called about meeting with investigators), the missionaries start having bad dreams about you!


Last Sunday in Rechnoy branch. Boris had a talk and he introduced the new additions to the branch mission plan, specifically 3 goals the branch presidency has asked every member to set for the rest of this year. 
1. Give a copy of the Book of Mormon to someone
2. Introduce someone to the missionaries
3. Invite someone to come to church


A branch missionary was called today, an RM sister who served in Novosibirsk, and it looks as if missionary work in the Rechnoy branch is about to take off!


Passed out the last of our “Finding Faith in Christ” DVDs. A good couple, Pavel and Natasha, slightly drunk in the park. Illustrated the Russian “I’m atheist and no convincing me otherwise” and then 30 seconds later, confiding “I really believe that something exists, a creator… but I haven’t seen Him!”


Natasha - “yell quieter, the whole park can hear you”
Pavel - “It’s my park! I’ll yell how I want!”


3/30/09
Today was all about packing and cleaning. P-day per the usual. Checked out a free shower place with Boris.


3/31/09
Clean Vova today! Met him at the central building around 9:30am. The story behind him… he’s a homeless man from Ukraine without a passport. He is deaf and mute, 60s, and walks super slow with a cane. He somehow started coming to church last year. He reads the Bible, Book of Mormon, and President Cranney interviewed him for baptism last year. He went back to Ukraine to get a passport and get things in order to be baptized, but didn’t come back. So recently, he did come back, but things didn’t get fixed (couldn’t get the passport I guess). He’s coming to church again, and he’s pretty smelly. It’s bad enough that it distracts members of the branch and investigators, so we were to take him to a center which gives free showers.


We met, walked to the metro, and went to Kurskaya. At 11am, we arrived at the center to hit the end of a line of other homeless people. We waited for 1 hour before they announced a 3 hour break. We had to leave, but we left him with new clothes, soap, razors, and bribed another homeless man with a bottle of water to help Vova get in and get a shower.


Stats and what not in the office. Meeting with Sergey in Zelenograd, so I got to see the building finally. The Plan of Salvation, went pretty well. We crossed paths with the Zelenograd Elders with their Tuesday night “game night”, aka, playing ping-pong and games with two branch girls between 16 and 18, and one of their girlfriends. No good, no good.


4/1/09 - Sokolniki: Taylor Knuth
Ch ch ch ch-ransfers! Elder Burgess and I rolled out of the house with all of our personal luggage from Khimki, both with our two big bags. We jammed them into a marshrutka, the driver surprisingly didn’t ask for extra fare. We blocked the back two seats completely and a seat up front too! Worked out so Elder Bunker and I ended up on a split, at Elder Lemon and Smith’s last meal, lunch at Starlite diner. Goodbyes, then met up with our new companions, Elder Knuth and Chemezov. We, Elder Knuth and I, dropped off his luggage at Sokolniki and came back to the central building for English club. Stress filled night of making sure it went through all right. Back home with my luggage this time. About 125 people at English club, not bad!


Welcome to AP-ship Elder Knuth!


4/2/09
District meeting at the Reese’s. A whole lot of stress from a phone call or two from Aleksey Pasechnik, our mini-missionary’s employer. He’s a member, she nannied for his 3 year old daughter, she got attached and Aleksey wanted Sveta back from her mini-mission. Some freaking out, a phone call to President, a decision to send her home (Wednesday night), then a cell-phone blockage (service center failed to pay our bill on time), so we couldn’t get a hold of the sisters.


We got to district meeting, I was the spiritual thought (using Preach My Gospel) and translating for the Reeses the whole time. After that, we had dinner (chicken and salad fro Sister Reese). The phones got switched back on during lunch, so we called Pres, he gave the word to axe Sveta, I broke it to Sisters Samsonovich and Nartova, but we decided to wait for Sveta that night (apparently the Pasechniks were still arranging for a place for her to live). But that night, President and the Sisters talked about it, a little more clearing up with the Pasechniks, and then Pres decided to sleep on it. The next day, we get a 7am phone call, she should continue to serve her mini-mission. No backlash from Aleksey Pasechnik, and their service even now continues.


In that same phone call w/President Cranney, during lunch at district meeting, we were instructed to immediately go to the airport to meet a very recently baptized, and even more recently deported member who was stranded. President Cranney handed the phone over to President Mikulin, who described Alexander, a 41 year old, bearded (w/goatee) man wearing a red boy scout neckerchief. He’s Russian, was baptized in Alaska, and the bishop took him to immigration to get everything sorted out with his visa, only to have him taken away in handcuffs on the next flight for Moscow.


We missed the Aeroexpress by 10 minutes, and the express to Lobnya by 5 minutes… so we bargained a Georgian taxi driver down to 1000 rubles and were off! We got his contact and promised a Book of Mormon in Georgian (found out later that it doesn’t exist yet… thanks for the mis-information Elder Knuth!).


Found Alexander, rode a Marshrutka back to Moscow and took the metro to Novokuznetskaya to have him meet President Mikulin at the central building. Passed him off, mission accomplished. 


Came to find out later that he had a plan to get refugee status in America, and then bring his family over… but he ran from Florida to Idaho (Driggs & Victor) to Alaska when he couldn’t get status before his visa ran out. We found a relative in Samara, and put him on a train.


4/3/09
Later, we were in the office to pick up my birthday package and into Khimki to meet with Mikhail. A good meeting about faith and trying to convince him to turn to God in prayer, to help his faith grow. Spent the night in Khimki.


4/4/09
Cleaned up in Khimki and took everything out to Sokolniki with Aleksandr’s help.


Got to work on our dirty ridiculous apartment here… working on the bathtub, toilet shelves, throwing junk away, dismantling beds, etc.


4/5/09
Happy 21st birthday for Elder Taylor, weird, never thought I’d be 21 years old!


We were at the first Sacrament meeting of the new Universitet branch, with 48 people present, among which were 1 investigator and 5 inactives. After which, we rushed to Sokolniki, arrived a little late (we thought 1:30pm was the start time, turned out to be 1pm).


Bore my testimony, had quite a few guests at church. We stayed in gospel doctrine to help liven up our law of consecration lesson for the long time members. Not much purpose staying in gospel principles without investigators, and with 4 other missionaries already in there.


Gave Sveta Voronina (mini-missionary) a blessing for her health, along with Elder Knuth.


Passing the sacrament to Natasha Derovyagina, and Elder Knuth is Elder Astronaut. Not ‘knoof, knoof’, which is the name of one of the 3 little pigs in the Russian version of the story.


4/6/09
Emails from all the family members wishing happy birthday and so on. A little stress with the new mini-missionary and miscommunication with orientation and what not, but was resolved. WE chilled at home after writing home, watched some church movies and some other Elders just came over like a couple of bums to just ‘hang out’.


The evening was spent in planning and in preparing for our meeting with President. Talking about ‘To them of the last transfer’ and what not.


4/7/09
8am in the office, transfers are big… every companionship, with the exception of 3, is being changed.


Cleared up Zelenograd’s ‘approved’ game night, the continually changing English club, sharing our ‘last transfer’ ideas, stats, etc. We’re averaging somewhere around 700 at church in the mission per week (from 650 to 750), between 13 or so branches.
* Zelenograd
* Lobnya
* Mitishi
* Zheleznodorozhny
* Kakhovsky
* Rechnoy
* International branch
* Ramenskoe
* Sokolniki
* Arbatsky
* Tigansky
* Podolsk
* Universitet


Elder Gallo and Baysinger called, they were on a split when Baysinger got sick and were finding a fill-in for service (teaching English at some club out at the end of the blue line). We were the last resort, so we went, showed up 1.5 hours late, taught Andrei and Dima English, then the creepy wife of the director, a 50-some bleach blonde larger lady in pink blouse and white skirt told us to ‘wait’. Way creepy, like Elder Price and I tracting into the hairy legged lady who let us in. But she came back with two liters of juice, cakes, a rulet, and chocolate bar for both of us! Dirty treats, but everything’s apparently been approved and permission slips signed, so everything’s in order. We spent the night with the office elders, having to tie up some loose ends in the office that night before English club.


4/8/09
Took orders from all the missionaries for BYUI dance performance ‘Dance of Life’, that takes place while I’m in Spain. We went to the place, the tower between VDNH and Timiryazevskaya, to buy 76 tickets with Elder Yorgeson. He’s the man, our mission financial secretary at the moment.


After that, had time to go home, eat lunch, and bounce to English club. Super stress night, with people on splits, wanting more splits (out of areas, out of zones, etc.), but went well. 145 people in total, 20 more than last week, with 21 new people. Got home late because we were stuck cleaning up… what can you do?!


4/9/09
District meeting at the Reeses, an overview of PMG chapter 10, basically for our lesson. Elder Foote is professor X bald, not just patchy like last night. Last week of your mission doesn’t make much sense to me, but whatever. Sister Reese is going to work with my gray suit pants (with the destroyed cuffs), so that could help me get some more wear out of them.


Did some planning, getting our thoughts and plans in order, and then met with Andrey Sementsov, our 1st counselor in the branch presidency. Great guy, he practices teaching us a lesson (basic) in gospel principles in English, then we read a chapter from the Book of Mormon and then we share our spiritual thought. His wife and daughter are non-member and inactive, respectively, so we’re kind of his family scripture study pals apparently. 


Tomorrow brings two sweet meetings!


4/10/09
Naeel invited us to come down to his workplace, the Russian Olympic Committee on Vorebyovy goree. We saw Russia’s head wrestling coach as we walked in, a 2-time gold medalist. Naeel shook hands with two fencing gold medalists as we walked in as well. WE met his boss, Gennadi Svetz, the head of the Russian Olympic Committe PR department and had a really good, brief, to the point last half of the first lesson. It was one of those experiences when I just felt like I was given what to say and when I felt that the Lord made full use of those language skills I’ve developed throughout my mission. He told us about Orthodox Easter, and the flame that’s spread out from Jerusalem throughout the world and how they fly it from Jerusalem to the Temple of Christ the Savior (near the Kremlin) for the midnight mass. WE gave him a copy of the Book of Mormon, which he accepted with pleasure. Afterwards, Naeel fed us lunch in the cafe (shashlik, potatoes, salad, and teddi juice), and we talked to some of his coworkers, including Dmitry Volskov, which whom he shares an office. A 3 time Olympic medalist (two silvers and one bronze) and 10 time world record holder in the breaststroke. And there was a lady with him, Olga. We taught them about the Book of Mormon, some of our basic beliefs, and Naeel proceeded to teach them the apostasy and the word of wisdom himself! Dmitry’s going to hook Elder Knuth up with a trip to Russia’s star city (kosmonaut HQ). Way cool experience. Elder Knuth and I were basically in shock, unbelievable.


Our meeting with Dima and Lauren fell through, so we spent the rest of the evening going through the area book, making phone calls, and what not.


4/11/09
General conference… the first two session and a brief reunion with Elder Smith (lanky, AZ, MTC, volleyball player), before bouncing to catch the aeroexperess to Sheremetovo to fly out to Spain.


Decided that before I get married, I’m going to read General Conference from the last 10 years to figure out how to be a husband and have a good family. They cover it all. Way good talk about covenants from Elder Christofferson.


Flew in late to MAdrid, found our room, SNACKS, and lights out!


4/12/09
No conference DVDs for us in Spain, so priesthood and sunday sessions will have to wait until Elder Knuth and I will get the chance at lunch. Two hours of church and the rest of the day dedicated to a temple walk, study, eating, singing practice and singing on the temple square. Day of rest, we also had a devotional from the temple president and his wife. Great spirit listening to those who have so much experience in missionary work, in living the gospel, and in life in general.


4/13/09
Short letters from home, Ammon and Sarah are expecting again (November) and not much newer than that. Good time with President HIll and a few pieces of advice coming down the stretch, including looking into contacting people you’ve worked with throughout your entire mission, where you might be the only one with the proper relationship to have the trust to make things happen, to look at it as the on-ramp for the highway of life.


After lunch, we had time in the city, Royal Palace of Madrid, by the cathedral near Sol or Opera metro. Worth the 8 Euro entrance fee. Also went into the cathedral, very impressive in size, had electric ‘candles’ ala Orthodox. But in a more westernized way. It was a 1 Euro donation to get in, and it strangely felt like a cleaner, better lit Russian Orthodox temple with benches. But the spirit wasn’t so much as present as the feeling of being in a museum. Really scary, quite creepy statues, and paintings of nuns, saints, the crucifixion, etc.


The palace was amazing in the fact that it was a bonafide huge palace, complete with a throne room, the King’s dressing room, personal dining room, bedroom, and other various rooms. Almost every single room, with maybe 3 or 4 exceptions, is bigger than any apartment I’ve lived in during my mission. I saw, by far, the biggest dinner table I’ve ever seen. In the banquet hall, it could seat 100 people easily, 50 on each side. One room has 5 stradivarius instruments on display, each worth millions of dollars.


We also walked around the old Egyptian temple nearby. It was closed, but still worth just seeing. The park it’s nestled in was full of people tanning, sprawled out on the grass, some people full on breaking the law of chastity in plain view. I’m grateful that, even if the virtue of Russia is no better, it isn’t that publicly acceptable to display it.


4/14/09
Morning of some good study, watching the sunday morning session of conference, including Elder Holland’s so talked about Atonement and ‘never being alone’ talk. A doctrinal class with Brother Arjona, who served in Ireland in 1980s. Shared a statement from his mission president, mature people do things they don’t want to do, immature people only do things they want to do. Read parts of Moses 7, Enoch’s story, and God’s weeping for man.


A session in the temple today, lots of interesting thoughts and questions, along with a little more empathy for Adam and Eve and understanding the fall. How they were cast out form the only place and people they knew, and knowing only that ‘in that day, though shalt surely die’ and that the fields would grow thorns and thistles, and they were to work for food, and that the father would send messengers… that’s it, all they knew, in completely foreign world outside the garden.


Gym! Played basketball for the first time in a long time (at least 8, maybe 9 months), and some volleyball. Good gym time. Teaching practice, tomorrow will be more time in the temple and then departure.


4/15/09
Wednesday found Elder Burgess, King, and myself in the temple doing initiatories and helping to confirm, and be witnesses in the baptistry in the morning. Portuguese sounds more like a French-German mix to me, than a Spanish relative. But that’s just to my untrained ear!


In the afternoon, we got the priesthood session of conference in and helped clean bird poop up on the temple grounds with all the other missionaries. The other 3 from our group, along with Elder Andersen and Anderson from Yekaterinburg, came back from Segovya, a castle city about 1-1.5 hours outside of Madrid.


After dinner, we made our momentous exit, getting goodbyes from everyone, including our Spanish “Russonary’ friend. Gave President Hill a shapka, Elder Berlin dip, and we were out and back to Russia


4/16/09
Got in 6:30-7am ish, fought off a few taxi guys who wanted 10 euros a person to Rechnoy station. Office, one of the Elders who was finishing that day brought his luggage in. Apparently was denied a temple recommend by President Cranney, “Are you honest in your dealings with your fellow men?” Don’t follow the rules you promised to obey when accepting your call to serve? Apparently you don’t pass that question… President gave him the ‘eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die’ verse.


Transfers had a pre-transfer meeting, where all the ‘last transfer’ missionaries gathered with President Cranney and he gave us some thoughts and ideas about making this transfer the best of our mission. What’s stuck with me is what he said about working as though we’re going back to our heavenly home in 6 weeks, not our earthly one.


All the companionships but 4 were changed with transfers, interesting times!


Lunch at Pizza Hut, our house is down to 2 people! So happy, a haircut and a little organizing.


4/17/09
District meeting with Elders Arutyunyan and Wilhome joining in. About how our power and authority can be manifest (see PMG chapter 1).


Sister Reese working miracles with the cuffs of my pants and it’ll hold out to the end of my mission and then some.


Office / service center with urgent potravki and off to Khimki to close the apartment. Elder Woffinden and I took all the blows from our sick, stressed out landlady. The shower’s broken, the wooden door handle, gas wrench missing, dirty toilet, dirty carpets, etc. etc. Lots of leftover stuff (it was an empty apartment when we rented it). She freaked, we offered to fix everything by Wednesday, a great saga ensued which ended up with us getting until Sunday morning, 10 am, to do it. We loaded everything in two big old IKEA bags, rolled up the mattress pad and were off on a marsrutka to the office to spend the night!


4/18/09
Free museum day! Made waffles for breakfast in the office, and pancakes. You couldn’t taste the coconut or the cinnamon, but whatever.


We first went to the Museum of Paleontology on Tyoply stan. NOT FREE, paid the 60 rouble student entry fee (word of advice, bring you student ID on your mission!) and saw dinosaurs, mammoths, all sorts of crazy animal skeletons. Followed by some hyper high school freshmen / eighth graders, just because we’re Americans. Humored them to the metro, and then parted ways. Met up with the sisters to find where the museum of photography was, but it moved 4 years ago! Then the Pushkin museum of fine arts. That was a good one… 45 minute wait, the lady behind us talking about the “Church of Jesus Christ” taking our lands and stuff from Russia. Lots of casts of superfamous statues (the David, the Pieta, the Thinker, discus thrower, etec.) Egyptian stuff, including mummies. Ditched the sisters here and stopped by one more, Museum of Archeology right outside gate of Red Square. Picked up an OCD weirdo tag-a-long child who followed us all around the museum.


The midnight mass was about the same as last year, but a littl emore chaotic in the Sokolniki temple, not as much room as on Novoslabodskaya. The same incense, lack of order, lack of spirit in the ceremonies. We were there only 30-40 minutes in total, including circling the temple outside.


4/19/09
Met our Khimki landlady, couldn’t find the cardboard box for the vacuum and attachments, so she took 1000 from the security deposit. We fixed the door handle (a little all purpose glue and some force), replaced the shower head, and showed how to close and open the gas with a normal wrench.


Got out to get Natasha the sacrament and meet her cleaning lady, Lyuba. For once, took the 32 trolley bus to church (not the 32 tramvai… important distinction). Good meeting, 80 people at church, Vova the recent convert, taught priesthood. His first lesson ever and he did a really good job, even with his stutter.


Konstantin left church early, so we were left without a meeting and without an investigator for the fireside with temple president Luthey. So, after a meeting about missionary work with the branch president, counselors, and other leaders, we went home to eat and plan and make phone calls, study.


4/20/09
11am arrival to Pervomayskaya apartment after writing home and buying a cake to deliver to the landlady. Dirty, not vacuumed, mirrors uncleaned, leftover sheets, blankets and towels (‘more towels??’ they kept repeating with every discovery of more. The windows taped with cheap black tape


11:40 arrival of landlady, the destruction begins. In the end, 8000 rubles deducted from the deposit for the windows, the cheap tape wouldn’t come off completely and pulled off paint when it did at all. A 1000 ruble therapeutic pillow was left on the balcony and ruined, overall hadn’t cleaned appliances and parts of the bed had been dismantled.


Needless to say, we came out glad that Aleksandr the driver was free to come pick us up, and the stuff, and we were in righteous indignation with Elders Berrett and Neilson for leaving the apartment in that condition, having told us it was ‘clean’


FHE at night with a meeting with Maksim, a new convert who was baptized 1 month ago, but turns out to be in Sokolniki’s boundaries. So, we got the pass along from Elder Jonovich and Berlin, and now it’s ours to work with President Kupaev on.


4/21/09
Into the office for stats and a meeting with President. Discussed ZLC and zone conference, determined what to do with those activities… found out that 4 days after I go home, President Uchtdorf and probably Elder Nielson of the twelve will be visiting Moscow! So close, but never got an apostle on my mission after the MTC. Shucks…


Most of the day spent in doing administrative stuff. Way unfulfilling, I want to do missionary work!


4/22/09
With ZLC tomorrow and several Elders wanting to spend the night before hand, we put the cleaning skills into overdrive! All morning and early evening. We took a break to meet Anton, a hockey player, at the metro and walk him to his sports arena, talk, and give him a Book of Mormon with my testimony written on the inside cover. His wheel on his hackey bag was borken, so he was dragging it, and it was basically impossible ot hear what he was saying at the first part. But he picked it up and carried it so we could talk further. We’ll see how things go. We’ll call in a week or so to see if he’s read anything.


After getting pretty much the whole house clean, with the exception of the death kitchen, we were gone to another stress-filled night of English club! We got some help to clean up this time, so it was a little better.


4/23/09
ZLC in Rosinka, ran from the metro to catch the bus. Going to try and make use of the senior couples in our mission more, a few English Club decisions, our training on splits (recalling some of our favorites, discussing their impact. Reviewing what guidelines our apostles and prophets have given us regarding splits, etc.)


Sister Cranney showed us Susan Boyle’s audition on YouTube and shared a CS Lewis quote about our divine potential.


President Cranney shared a Parley P. Pratt quote about the presence of the spirit and a blog post called “Holy Zombies” written by a worker in Meridian Towers, where our office is. He talked about having the spirit about us.


The new apartment kitchen sets have been gathered! And our house is almost there!


Andrey Sementsov, not his church self at home, more sullen and melancholy. Except at the example of a tuning fork with the spirit, he got really excited about that being a great object lesson! Strange how a first counselor in a branch presidency answers “I don’t know” to the question “How does the Holy Ghost work?” Perhaps the weight of family not being in the church wears on him, knowing that their family isn’t prepared for eternity.


Knocked on our neighbor’s door, the Mikulins, and President Mikulin answered in his garments. WE chatted, sorted out a few things with bills and talked to him about President Cranney’s investigator, super nicest guy ever… You knock on your stake president’s doo and he answers in his Gs? Whatever, he’s money.


Noticed that this week has just felt like disarray, closing apartments, missing study, cleaning apartments, meeting w/President, ZLC, haven’t had a full study yet and it shows! Like President Cranney said and like in PMG Chapter 2 it’s written, study inspires, offers consolation, and just brings the spirit more abundantly! Don’t like skipping it :(


4/24/09
Full study year! Felt good today to study like a real missionary.


District meeting was really good today, for me at least. Elder Kulikovsky taught from a BYU devotional talk entitled, “Honest, Simple, Solid, True”, from C Terry Warner in 1996. It was an example of a gentle reproach from the spirit, in realizing how far I still have to go in my relationships with others. To stop talking bad about them, which will eventually lead to stop thinking bad about them, and instead by filling my thoughts and words with compliments.


He gave 3 stories from the talk of interactions that helped me see how I need to repent and stop being so judgemental of other missionaries. I need to talk more positively and I need to try more unreservedly to inspire and uplift at the risk of my reputation or appearance before others.


A good planning session has already helped us sow seeds, which will require a great amount of work to reap the fruits. Split crazy for the last transfer, planning final p-days, and PB and J feast to end our nightly planning!


5/1/09
Another full week without writing… still going at a whirlwind pace… but things should settle in the next week or so without any further zone conferences, unless you count May 23rd and mission conference with Elder Senkins, an Area 70 from Latvia. But then again, with missionaries losing their passports (like Elder KIng on the Sputnik into Moscow today), and we get the opportunity to go out to Ramenskoe from Rechnoy to meet Razif, the man who found it, along with the Elders’ phone, who wanted 500 rubles for it. We worked it out without paying in the end.


Then new senior couples coming in and apartment showing for them, and then cleaning up after the sisters and sleeping there because it’s too late to go home, and then waking up the next morning at 4:30am to clean more, and in order to leave at 5:30am to get home in time to shower, eat a little, and get ready for another zone conference. Who knows how ‘settled’ things will get! I guess I owe myself and posterity an overview of this week.. Be it as may in retrospect.


4/25/09
Branch activity… and in accordance with the only other branch activity I’ve had in Sokolniki (besides picnics), we made vareniki! Again with cherries… and this time we added a spiritual thought from President Kupaev, a spiritual thought from Yegor, 5 year old son of Maksim and his wife, who actually live on Krilatskoe (not in our branch :( 


A musical number from Elder Knuth on the piano and a showing of Finding Faith in Christ.


Our ‘Finding out’ meeting with Konstantin didn’t yield very many results with dog lady Anya there as well. A first lesson nonetheless, and then we flagged a ride with Bakhtyor, an Uzbek taxi driver, to Prospect Mira for 300 rubles in time to meet President Mikilun in the metro and Aleksandr, President Cranney’s contact who brought a friend. His friend turned out to be editor of a substantial cultural magazine… he works in the embassy and it’s very apparent that they are both very educated and respectable people. President Mikulin related the first vision as we walked in the park opposite of the Olympic stadium. We talked about many things with them… Aleksandr basically quoted the D&C when he said that he wanted as many people as possible to have the opportunity to know about our church, because many want to know, but know not where to find it it… he just feels that it wouldn’t be quite right if he were a baptized member of the church.


President Mikulin made a comment to us that even when it seems that people aren’t listening to us, or we work without seeing any results on our missions, just the fact that we leave our apartments and are on the street with the spirit already has an effect, an influence on the people who see us.


4/26/09
Joe, from Tunisia, came to church with his wife Larissa, and their youngest daughter. Rather unexpected, pleasant surprise as they stayed for Sacrament.


Our meeting about home teaching didn’t happen, the Elders quorum president didn’t exactly get word apparently, so he just went home right after church. We got Natasha the sacrament and then had time to eat dinner.


4/27/09
Playing basketball at Novokuznetskaya for the last time. Ashan for all of our groceries and then two FHE appointments. 


We caught a cab to Baumanskaya from Sokolniki, because we were on the bus stop and not the tramvay stop! A guy from Chechnya, Elder Knuth sat on some blankets and sheets in the back (the seat was folded down, he was either moving or lives in his car… He went off about how unfair Allah is, we took a wrong turn. He wanted 50 extra rubles for gas, because it was my fault he made the wrong turn… and we both speak more coherent Russian than he does! Oh well, we were only 10 minutes late in the end and the family forgot we were coming anyway! 


So we waited for about 15 minutes in their house, explained that we had another appointment, and had a spiritual thought with Sergey Botezat. He’s made a lot of growth and matured spiritually in the last 9 months since I was last in the area. His prayer to end the spiritual thought was amazing, and it’s clear that his understanding of the gospel has increased greatly.


Next stop Politov family. Also showed up 10 minutes late, but they also forgot that we were coming! Set up an appointment 1 day in advance, and no one can remember! Drank juice, tea, conversed, then on to a spiritual lesson with Brother Politov. Their daughter came over to learn how to make sharlotka; 1 cup flour, 1 cup sugar, 3-4 eggs, cut up apples, cinnamon cake, so Sister Politova, Anya, left with her.


We shared Either 12:27, and my story about the bus on the way to Vitali’s in KZ, and the young man with a red cap who left without my talking to him. It was a good spiritual thought / lesson, and we invited him to come help give Lauren Dower a blessing on Wednesday. Off to the office apartment because Elder Knuth goes to Kiev tomorrow for visa and I’ll be in the office.


4/28/09
Met with President. Figured out the sisters situation, rules on writing home and switching P-day to Wednesdays again, plus some transfer fun!


Boring stat print outs and charts… although it was a really good week by the stats of our mission.


Phone calls to finish out an uneventful day.


4/29/09
The start of the zone conferences!


South zone, gave our training about using our time in the best way, not just in a good way… and a little about missionary things versus missionary work. Sister Cranney about acting the way she wants to feel, instead of the way she actually feels. With story time, Winston Churchill and Alexander Fleming, two bananas, there’s always another bus.


President Cranney whips out the deep doctrine, talking about God’s glory as intelligence, which is light and truth, and about the properties of light, the size of the everything in light years. God’s all powerfulness and omniscience, how he sees the past, present, and future as one eternal now. Tied it all in to the other definition of God’s glory, according to Moses 1:39. Rolled out a few goals… by the end of his mission, 1 year from now, he wants:
* 1000 average attendance at church across the mission (currently 700)
* 100 baptisms in the next year (vs 20 in past calendar year)
* 4 member present lessons per companionship per week (vs 1 currently)
* 2 new investigators per companionship per week (vs ¼ currently)


A little pooped out that I won’t be here for the realization of these goals… or who knows what next summer might bring! (2010 Kiev temple dedication, trip with the brother to see it and his mission and a train ride to Moscow??)


Took Natasha for a walk, I bought my books, Evgeny Onyegin, Crime and Punishment, and the Master and the Margarita.


English club for me and crazy split. Blessing giving lesson teaching time for Elder Knuth.


He went with Igor Politov from the central building, they went to Dima and Lauren’s. Elder Knuth ended up giving a blessing to Lauren, who just had her 3rd miscarriage, in which he promised her that she would carry a child… pretty powerful blessing! I’m behind in journal writing, and the details are preserved in email, so moving on.


4/30/09
The north zone conference, #2 of my 3 departing testimonies. Cleaned up after zone conference and helped Sister Brown move from Vodny Stadium to Prospekt Mira, then went back to Vodny to clean up, clear out, and get things ready for the Holmes, a senior couple, to set up camp there while we find them a more long term apartment. Threw away months worth of sister missionary clothing, vacuumed with the pet brush, etc. The office swung by for the leftover victuals, since Elder Earl is a little low on grocery money.


5/1/09
We wended up staying the night there and getting up at 4:30am to finish cleaning up for President and Sister Cranney to inspect. Then we swung by the store for lychee and guava drink, exotic drink fun, which just turned out to be sugary syrup drink with hints of unknown fruit. Hit the metro in the 5 o’clock hour to shower and eat at home, then run over to open the Sokolniki building for zone conference.


After Elder Knuth holding his ice breaker ‘rod’ above his head as Moses (ZL training), we rode with the Cranneys and the Reeses to do the final check.


From there, we had to undertake operation passport retrieval. Elder King left his passport and cell phone in the train on the way in to Moscow. Luckily on the Sputnik, which is an expensive express commuter train with the kind of clientele that would actually return or report those kinds of items. So it was reported to the office. We went out to Ramenskoe to meet the guy and get the passport and phone. I pretended not to speak Russian at first as part of the plan to get it back without paying him money. I was willing to put my birthday peanut butter down for that… but after my ‘zdrazchya!’ he just handed it over and that was it. Elders King and Neilson met us with juice and a Medovik to repay us for dealing with it all.


5/2/09
Studied and made it to the Vodny apartment to meet the Holmes and Stapleys. Brother Holmes is way cool. Sister Holmes a little shell shocked. They lost a bag, so we went with them to the airport to retrieve it from unclaimed luggage, which Sister Holmes lovingly compared to outer darkness. Got free McDs on the way and a 100 ruble gift from Sister Stapley, way nice people. WE showed the Holmes the store, wrote out for Sister Holmes a translation of the basic cooking necessities (yeast, soda, salt, sugar, flour, baking powder, etc.) and took them to the metro. Showed them the metro, and met up with Elder Yorgeson to send them on their way!


5/3/09
Meeting with new member Maksim about tithing, how to pay it, following laws, and a little about the priesthood. Good fast and testimony meeting, including a less-active who just woke up yesterday and said something in him just said ‘need to come back’, so, after years of inactivity he showed up and bore testimony of the church, the Book of Mormon, and Joseph Smith. Maksim also bore testimony.


Konstantine is still living the word of wisdom. Tried to get me to tell his mom, but told him to do it. Joe came with Larissa and daughter, but still only stayed for one hour.


Sasha’s deep doctrine, veil into the spirit world, Atonement lesson (good thing Maksim shuffled on into the gospel doctrine lesson).


Mayorov family ar amazing. Brother Mayorov wants to be at lessons with us, yeah!


We met Antony at red gate with a bag of food, apples, bananas, bread, water and sausage. We talked for a while. He told us about how much his life is in tatters at the moment. We promised blessings for obedience, and the man offered to come clean my companion’s pants, cook for us, iron our clothes in repayment for the food! He’s probably planning to go back to Ethiopia to try a consulting company, seeing as his race keeps him in the corner and exploited here in Russia. Worst life, his Russian wife expected and expects him to bring money, so he got into gambling to bring her money. Baptized in October 2008, but no members or branch leadership were involved, we’re his only ties and friends.


Natasha’s trying to find someone to invite to a lesson with us. She complains because we ‘don’t call’, even though we do the sacrament weekly and took her out last week. She’s had way too much attention from way too many missionaries for way too long, so the weaning will be upsetting.


5/4/09
Shipped my books home, saw the metro museum and graveyard at Novodavichi, with Chekhov, Yeltsin, the 2nd astronaut, and lots of heroes of the Soviet Union. Famous composers, authors, scientists, thinkers, actors, actresses, generals, admirals, and other rich people. Pretty crazy, especially in comparison with other Russian cemeteries. Finished out cleaning, endless carpet lint rolling and vacuuming.


Called Yegor, talked to him. He’s a Pizza Hut supervisor, finished school, flew to Dubai for training and might come to Moscow soon. Got his email, I’ll try more to help at home. Maksim said call back, I called back and he didn’t pick up. I can’t get through to Yura, rings and rings and rings. I’ll try Vitali on Sunday morning.


Mitishi didn’t call in, we were up till 1am, playing chess and on the line with Brother Gavrilov, who climbed the gate, checked out the house, threw rocks at the window until they woke up. They had a miscommunication… didn’t call in and their phone was charging while off. Quite the adventure!


5/5/09
Cinco de Mayo! Office black hole of death; stats and getting acquainted with the IMOS system, which is the new mission office system. Got Brother Rick Page’s help in teaching and meeting with Joe, mini-missionaries is still up in the air. We need to call around come the weekend, transfer board shuffling, etc.


Meeting with Joe in his apartment, Larisa, his Russian wife, left right when we got there, so we taught Joe the Plan of Salvation with our picture set, while he held Miriam, fed her, etc. He’s already read the Book of Mormon through once, but is now for understanding reading selected parts! He looks forward to meeting, anyday after 5pm basically!


On the way home, we stopped into Pyatyorichka for detergent, bread, and some other things. I waited in line forever while everyone yelled at Elder Knuth for being a bad, lazy security guard. Haha, just like in every store, everyone assumes we work here because of the white shirt and tie.


Found out that Niki dumped Elder Berlin, Dear John-ed him for another guy. That’s pretty harsh, 23-24 months out and she decides to send a letter. Glad I’m no strings attached going home.


5/6/09
Operation ‘vary your routes of travel’. A babushka tried to follow us home from English club today, so we had to do a little weaving and made our way up a side street, and left her staring at us from a street corner… so secret agent style!


We had a meeting with Antony today, a man who was baptized last October. He met the missionaries the same day he lost 100k rubles (3 or 4k USD) gambling. He’s from Ethiopia, has lived in Russia for years after having come here from Switzerland. He went inactive after moving to Sviblovo and getting kicked out by his wife. She came to expect him to bring more money home than he was earning (seaside vacations, lifestyle expectations). So he started gambling to bring more home. Now, he’s a mess. He’s got a room with his brother’s wife’s mother on Krasnaya Vorota. We went up to his room, he gave us some African ties in repayment for the food. We sat in his meager little room, testifying of Christ, praying together and committing him to come to church. He’s up to his eyeballs in debt, can’t get honest work to pay off his debts, despite his education. He broke down into tears in front of us. All we could do is listen, then offer the comfort of Christ, read Alma 7:11-13 together and encourage him in Christ. We left that little room with somber countenance, but having helped Antony feel the spirit for the first time in a while.


We showed the Holmes 3 apartments after that. Sister Holmes will be difficult to appease, but we’re working on it!


Time for dinner, back home before heading out to English club. We dropped below 100 in attendance (98), but still 24-25 new comers and I saw at least 4 Book of Mormons handed out, along with several ‘Finding Faith in Christ’ DVDs after the spiritual thought.


Cleaning up with Elder Gallo and Adamo. President Pieper didn’t show up, and dodged the stalking babyshka.


Branch records as of Feb 2009
* Tagansky: 269
* Kakhovsky: 290
* Arbatsky: 390
* Podolsk: 33
* Zheleznodorzhny: 32
* Ramenskoe: 58
* Lobnya: 30
* Mitishi: 39
* Rechnoy: 292
* Zelenograd: 226
* International branch: 157
* Sokolniki: 269


5/7/09
Traded one of our drying racks for the sister’s old Sokolniki and International ranch area books.


Sister Cranney treated us with some mini-cinnamon rolls and we chatted with President a little about transfers. He saw our draft, we moved the transfer board around.


District meeting at the Yorgesens. Sister Yorgesen made us some stew slime.. Pretty tasty, using cornstarch to thicken. I translated for the 4 senior missionaries our training about spiritual light from Elder Kulikovsky. President changed his mind about Victory day, thanks to the District Presidents freaking out about it as the most dangerous time for us to be on the streets. So, no missionary clothes or tags, and be in by 5pm to plan and clean apartments. We’ve got a potential Red Square invite from Naeel, our Olympic committee journalist and former professional long distance runner.


The rest of our day was dedicated to making sense of our newly inherited area book, the Sokolniki sisters, and planning out our week. 12 sit down meetings, 4 member present lessons, 2 new investigators, and a baptismal date… some faith demanding goals, but they’re accomplishable.


Lauren is in the hospital after having something burst in her that is related to having babies… so no meetings for her or Dima for about a week now!


5/8/09
Some much needed contacting to start off the day. The first time Elder Knuth and I have had a chance to set aside contacting time for our area. Worked from our house to Cherkizovskaya metro, giving out ‘Together Forever’ DVDs, getting the junk cussed out of us (Russian swearing goes far beyond even our all encompassing four letter words!) and finding out the meaning of the colors orange and black in relation to Victory day.


We set aside a time to make a lot of the necessary phone calls that we just run out of time to make on an everyday basis, with our weekly planning fresh in our minds.


Thanks to those calls, we were able to meet with Konstantine and with Dima Timurshin, and determine that in addition to living the word of wisdom, he needs to renew his scripture reading. We set a baptismal date for the 18th of July, after Dima bore his testimony and conversion story. We’re going to be calling regularly to make sure he’s keeping the word of wisdom and reading the Book of Mormon. 


From our meeting with Konstanine, we were off to Joe and Larissa’s. Family spiritual thought, brought in the 4 kids, her 12 year old, eldest son wasn’t there, but the other 4 (ages 6 to 1), came into the bare kitchen to listen. We shared the tuning fork spiritual thought, about comparing us to tuning forks and the voice of the spirit to the tone of a tuning fork. The kids took turns banging the fork, trying to make the same sound, holding it up to their ears. After that, Larissa and Joe remained to tell us all about the state of the custody battle with Larissa’s late first husband’s parents. They’re not planning on fleeing the country anymore, because Larissa thinks she can get the trial moved to Moscow and she’s registering her parents to the apartment, so that the kids aren’t registered there, and it removes the motivation for falsifying charges (custody of the children would have included possession of the apartment to care for them).


Larissa shared all of that, and then we did a short lesson with Joe. He prayed about the Plan of Salvation and got his answer that it’s true! We left after a short visit, leaving them wanting for more… better than overstaying your welcome :)


The Mitishi elders spent the night before Victory day, and we got a call from President Cranney and found out that Slava Perevalov, the mini-missionary serving with Elder Kulikovsky, finished his mini-mission (not exactly a happy ending) and Kulikovsky will be with us in a threesome starting tomorrow.


5/9/09
Victory day!


Out to the parade with Elder Wilhite and Arutyunyan. We were next to Mayakovskaya station and saw both proceedings (two parts to the parade). But it was the same parade as last year, the same show of power, missiles, guns, tanks, etc.


We walked from there to Arbat and walked Arbat street with all the caricature artists, stores, and restaurants. We ate at Sbarro’s, walked the street to Novokuznetskaya to meet up with Elder Kulikovsky. An awkward encounter with Sister Brown and Elder Knuth (elbow tugging). We gave in, went to Tsaritsino and crossed one other site off my list of things to see.


Got way bored, played Uno behind the palace. Sister Brown lied to me about playing frisbee, we left, gathered what we could at Elder Kulikovsky’s Babushkinskaya apartment (his stuff, food, etc.) and cleaned up some stuff. Brought it all back and spent the rest of the night getting cleaned up and moving Elder Kulikovsky moved in. Elder Knuth made his phone call too.


5/10/09
Evgeny Tsigankov was just called as the new Elder’s quorum president and we are still left without an active branch mission leader.


We met with Maksim and the Mayorovs after church., and taught him about the priesthood. WE talked about the necessity of wearing clothes at church that reflect the calling, that is, a white shirt and tie. And so, accordingly, next Sunday he showed up in white shirt and tie… in jeans with his long white shirt untucked :)


Later was my Mother’s day phone call. Paige has the cutest, highest pitched little girl voice ever. Kind of like a “we’ll see you in 3 weeks” phone call without actually saying “we’ll see you in 3 weeks”


5/11/09
Still a part of the holiday, so a lot of people still out at their dachas. Let’s be honest, I’m writing in the metro, one week after the fact, without my planning (having left it in the office), so I can’t recall. I’ll add it once I get the planner back! 


5/12/09
The better part of the day in the office, talking with President, doing statistics, prepping for English club, etc.


The evening brought us to our next door neighbor’s, President Dmitry Mikulin, his wife, and daughter Masha. We did a spiritual thought with a sponge and water and scripture study. WE found out just a few hours earlier that lauren’s situation in the hospital had worsened. She now had a blood clot in her knee and would need surgery. A pretty high risk situation from what Dima, her husband said. So, we started a fast for her. We turned down the Mikulin’s juice and cookies because we were fasting. President Mikulin told us to get President Kupaev involved right away, so we called him as soon as we got home, all 2 feet across the hall. President Mikulin’s more excited for me to go home and start a ‘new life’ than I could ever be. Sister Mikulin and Elder Kulikovsky just talked forever about different people in Lugansk (they’ve both from the same city), but Elder Kulikovsky was baptized a few years after Sister Mikulin had already left.


5/13/09
We caught a train out to Sergeev Pasad with Elder Jenson and Barney to check out the Russian Orthodox ‘Temple Square’. A lot more talked up than it turned out to be in reality. Elder Knuth, dressed up in white shirt and tie, was chewed out in one of the temples by a man in jeans and a jacket for having his hands in his pockets in a holy place. We found Aleksandr Dvorkin’s book about totalitarian sects and cults, and guess who made chapter 1! None other than ‘The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints’ aka Mormons. The garments had been drawn, all sorts of uncited statistics about the wealth of our church, and how we brain wash people and completely unfounded conclusions ‘although Mormons today have only 1 wife and 1 mother, they still remain polygamists’ or ‘the important thing to remember is that Mormons have no relation to Christ or Christianity, and association with them not only removes you from your culture, family, nation, and traditions, but also removes you from Jesus Christ himself and his church.’


It’s probably a good thing that a small percentage of Orthodox actively adhere to and strictly follow the precepts of their religion… or else they’d be fed misinformation like that from priests and temple workers. I picked up a bunch of matryoshki and we held solid to our fast for Lauren. When we called Dima back Thursday, we found out that she was already home! The blood clot turned out to be a fallopian tube swelling and restricting one of her veins or arteries or something. The Lord heard and answered our prayers and fasting.


That Wednesday we were back for Ashan shopping and off to English Club.


5/14/09
We have quite a number of apartments set up to look at. The first is a no-go, the owner has about half the closets and drawers blocked off for storing their old stuff.


The second apartment, across the street, is money! 3 room, all remodeled with a really nice kitchen, for 55,000 roubles a month ($1.7k) + utilities. We agreed right there that they wanted the apartment, left 3k rouble deposit to reserve it and that it wouldn’t be shown to anyone until we signed the contract on Saturday. We all left happy and relieved that the search had finally come to an end, and with a good result too!


Then Friday, we had this whole re-work the contract deal. WE had sent our standard contract to the owner and she sent it back with her realtor’s redlines. WE call around, talked to Rick Page about it, then took it home. WE had to translate and adjust the English portion to match the Russian, so some of our Friday night and Saturday morning… only to get a phone call at 8:30am. We stopped the translation, the owner couldn’t be convinced. Come to find out that she had relatives unexpectedly fly in from Israel that very day and they will be staying in the apartment for the entire summer. So, like that, our dreams were dashed.


In the end, the Holmes are taking the green vase Grandma apartment, with a high rent (65k) for 2 rooms, that feels like an old palace wallpaper. We’ll sign the contract Tuesday the 19th, and get this whole saga finished!


5/15/09
Elder Kulikovsky will be off on a split today until Monday. Hallelujah that we’re NOT in a threesome for a few days!


President Mikulin told us not to shower with cold water on Tuesday. Even though our hot water has been off since Monday… So we bought a replacement plug for our external water heater in the shower, replaced that, and then tried it out. I turned the red dial to redirect the water from the sink to the shower water heater. The dial broke off… looked like a wing nut more than a dial, so I got a monkey wrench. I turned it a little, and water started out the shower head. I turned a little more, only to have the pipe burst and water come gushing out! I yelled to Elder Knuth in the kitchen to turn the water off, and he did, and we were left with a half-flooded bathroom, soaked flip flops, and a pipe connector / joint in two parts. It had rusted away and so I took it off. We thought we’d need a plumber, called Lyuba about who to call, then decided that if we could find the part, we could easily replace it ourselves.


It took some time to clean it up and get everything in order. Then we headed out for District meeting at Yorgesens. Beef stroganoff and rice from Sister Yorgesen. A training about ‘successful missionaries’ from Elder Kulikovsky, and I translated for the Yorgesens and Reeses. Elder Kulikovsky went with Elders Adamo and Gallo right after district meeting. We ran back up to the office to work on the contract we wanted to sign the next day for the HOlmes to move into an apartment. We worked on it, printed it out, and decided to take it home to discuss and translate, especially the changes that the owner had proposed.


WE bought the needed part and I fixed our problem, so our cold water runs again! Hot water is off anyway, so no difference there.


5/16/09
A most unpleasant call from Nina, the real estate agent around 8:30am… the apartment is off! The owner called her to cancel our arrangements… here’s how it went down.


5/29/09
Well, i think the previous few lines pretty well encapture how the last 12 days of my mission went… fast! Luckily, Elder Knuth and I did some collaborating in aking his emails home a good day-y-day coverage of what happened and he’s forwarded those all on to my email as a basis to write from. At the moment, as I sit on Delta 31 from Moscow to JFK, I won’t try to recall all of the events in a haphazard manner. For now, I’ll just write about the last few days. My journal seems to be getting a Book of Mormon feel, chronologically that is.. With writings of different periods at different times. Now, let’s take a step back to Tuesday…


5/26/09
Basically, all my bags are packed, so I can bring them to my exit interview with President Cranney, so he can take them home with him and it’s one less peron’s baggage to take from the central building on Thursday.


My exit interview was 9am, interesting, about school, my plans back home, not to go out and get engaged in a week or two, etc. An interesting thing though, he asked if I had any suggestions for him as a mission president! I talked to him about a ‘culture of discipline’ amongst the missionaries and encouraging them to speak about the work amongst one another. President Cranney really is a humble guy. He took notes of my suggestions! I’ll miss the chance I’ve had to work with him and Sister Cranney.


Try as we might, we couldn’t get a meeting with Greg, his crazy doctor schedule (and walking around Izmaylovsky park) just didn’t allow for it. I got his email though. We had a final meeting with Joe. Larissa was at work, she’s a real estate agent, so we met with just him. When we asked if he had read and prayed about the Book of Mormon and Joseph Smith, he said that every time he reads, he prays about it. And with every prayer, he feels more and more that it’s true! We taught him the 10 commandments, and the hand signs for them so he can teach his children. I wrote my testimony in a journal (in the front cover) and then gave it to him to write his thoughts and impressions in. Got his email and I’ll have to have someone translate for me.


On the way home, we got a couple of 100% fruit ice cream to finish things off.


5/27/09
The long awaited day has come! We caught the Aeroexpress up to Sheremetovo 2, and met Elders Nikolaenev and Balgakov, and Sister Dayberry, our first new missionaries since December… and Sister Dayberry the first American in a year! From the airport, we went to lunch at the Cranneys, then went down to Red Square to take their ‘Welcome to Moscow” picture. We met Sister Brown and Samsonovich and split off to contact for a little while. I went with Elder Balgakov, and remember how terrified I was my first time with Elder Hancock and Berlin, but he started to get the hang of it by the end. A few days with Elder Berrett and he’ll be sure to get more used to contacting!


After that, it was back to Rosinka, dinner, interviews with President Cranney while Elder Knuth and I wrote home. Mom and Dad were the only ones who could hold out to the end! Amanda and Aaron stopped about a month ago. Then went to sleep. WE prayed with President Cranney about a confirmation with the decision on who’s training who.


5/28/09
Up and off to orientation. From 9-12, we ran through it all and President Cranney gave a good doctrinal training on obedience and the unity of the mission as necessary to have the Lord’s work go forward.


From the orientation we went to transfers, late. After applause from the mission at the announcement of new missionaries, and the transfer meeting, and final pictures and goodbyes, a few of us went to say goodbye to Natasha Derevyagina (Elders King, Burgess, and myself). We got stuck in the metro, so we didn’t get back to meet up quite on time, but everything turned out well in the end.


5/30/09
Last night, I was met as I walked down the hall to arrivals by Stephanie with a “Welcome home Elder Taylor!” sign, and her husband Kaylon. Amanda, Aaron, Brandon, Ammon, Sarah, and Paige (she’s scared of me, doesn’t remember me), Mom, Dad, Grandma and Grandpa Taylor. Ammon and company went home, and Aaron ran over to his all night graduation party. The rest came home, and I had a string cheese, a Costco muffin, and then President Miller came over. We chatted and I gave a little report on my mission. I told him about Elder Parker, a companion I loved serving with, about Yura, someone I had the opportunity to share the gospel with, and about the state of the church in general. He released me by the authority given him of the Quorum of the Twelve and First Presidency, not by laying on of hands. It was an unusual feeling… unlike I’ve experienced before. Perhaps the mantle being removed… I’m not sure. That was around 12am, so we all decided to head to bed. After President Miller repeated President Cranney’s thought about praying in the mission language to keep it current, I decided that I don’t need a third message from God and made a promise in my personal prayers to always pray in Russian.


President Miller also mentioned, when I asked what service I could render in my little less than  month here before school, he made mention of the temple, the need for veil workers and endowed men to perform baptisms for the dead… so first thing when I see Bishop Harmer will be to express my desire to help there in the coming weeks.


Appendix